<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-4-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife’s</b> house in the morning.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</b> dressed in new clothes, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Well⁠—madam, now have I dressed you, and set you out with so many ornaments, and spent upon you ounces of essence and pulvillio;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> and all this for no other purpose but as people adorn and perfume a corpse for a stinking secondhand grave: such, or as bad, I think Master Sparkish’s bed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Hold your peace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Nay, madam, I will ask you the reason why you would banish poor Master Harcourt forever from your sight; how could you be so hard-hearted?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>’Twas because I was not hard-hearted.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>No, no; ’twas stark love and kindness, I warrant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>It was so; I would see him no more because I love him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Hey day, a very pretty reason!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>You do not understand me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>I wish you may yourself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I was engaged to marry, you see, another man, whom my justice will not suffer me to deceive or injure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Can there be a greater cheat or wrong done to a man than to give him your person without your heart? I should make a conscience of it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I’ll retrieve it for him after I am married a while.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>The woman that marries to love better, will be as much mistaken as the wencher that marries to live better. No, madam, marrying to increase love is like gaming to become rich; alas! you only lose what little stock you had before.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I find by your rhetoric you have been bribed to betray me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Only by his merit, that has bribed your heart, you see, against your word and rigid honour. But what a devil is this honour! ’tis sure a disease in the head, like the megrim or falling-sickness, that always hurries people away to do themselves mischief. Men lose their lives by it; women, what’s dearer to ’em, their love, the life of life.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Come, pray talk you no more of honour, nor Master Harcourt; I wish the other would come to secure my fidelity to him and his right in me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>You will marry him then?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Certainly, I have given him already my word, and will my hand too, to make it good, when he comes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Well, I wish I may never stick pin more, if he be not an arrant natural, to t’other fine gentleman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I own he wants the wit of Harcourt, which I will dispense withal for another want he has, which is want of jealousy, which men of wit seldom want.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Lord, madam, what should you do with a fool to your husband? You intend to be honest, don’t you? then that husbandly virtue, credulity, is thrown away upon you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>He only that could suspect my virtue should have cause to do it; ’tis Sparkish’s confidence in my truth that obliges me to be so faithful to him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>You are not sure his opinion may last.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I am satisfied, ’tis impossible for him to be jealous after the proofs I have had of him. Jealousy in a husband⁠—Heaven defend me from it! it begets a thousand plagues to a poor woman, the loss of her honour, her quiet, and her⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>And her pleasure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>What d’ye mean, impertinent?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Liberty is a great pleasure, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I say, loss of her honour, her quiet, nay, her life sometimes; and what’s as bad almost, the loss of this town; that is, she is sent into the country, which is the last ill-usage of a husband to a wife, I think.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> O, does the wind lie there?⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Then of necessity, madam, you think a man must carry his wife into the country, if he be wise. The country is as terrible, I find, to our young English ladies, as a monastery to those abroad; and on my virginity, I think they would rather marry a London jailer, than a high sheriff of a county, since neither can stir from his employment. Formerly women of wit married fools for a great estate, a fine seat, or the like; but now ’tis for a pretty seat only in Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields, <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s-Fields, or the Pall-Mall.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</b>, dressed like a Parson.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Madam, your humble servant, a happy day to you, and to us all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>Amen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Who have we here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>My chaplain, faith⁠—O madam, poor Harcourt remembers his humble service to you; and, in obedience to your last commands, refrains coming into your sight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Is not that he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>No, fy, no; but to show that he ne’er intended to hinder our match, has sent his brother here to join our hands. When I get me a wife, I must get her a chaplain, according to the custom; that is his brother, and my chaplain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>His brother!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>And your chaplain, to preach in your pulpit then⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>His brother!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Nay, I knew you would not believe it.⁠—I told you, sir, she would take you for your brother Frank.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Believe it!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>His brother! ha! ha! he! he has a trick left still, it seems. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Come, my dearest, pray let us go to church before the canonical hour is past.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>For shame, you are abused still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>By the world, ’tis strange now you are so incredulous.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>’Tis strange you are so credulous.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Dearest of my life, hear me. I tell you this is Ned Harcourt of Cambridge, by the world; you see he has a sneaking college look. ’Tis true he’s something like his brother Frank; and they differ from each other no more than in their age, for they were twins.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Ha! ha! ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Your servant, sir; I cannot be so deceived, though you are. But come, let’s hear, how do you know what you affirm so confidently?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Why, I’ll tell you all. Frank Harcourt coming to me this morning to wish me joy, and present his service to you, I asked him if he could help me to a parson. Whereupon he told me, he had a brother in town who was in orders; and he went straight away, and sent him, you see there, to me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Yes, Frank goes and puts on a black coat, then tells you he is Ned; that’s all you have for’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Pshaw! pshaw! I tell you, by the same token, the midwife put her garter about Frank’s neck, to know ’em asunder, they were so like.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Frank tells you this too?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Ay, and Ned there too: nay, they are both in a story.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>So, so; very foolish.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Lord, if you won’t believe one, you had best try him by your chambermaid there; for chambermaids must needs know chaplains from other men, they are so used to ’em.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Let’s see: nay, I’ll be sworn he has the canonical smirk, and the filthy clammy palm of a chaplain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Well, most reverend doctor, pray let us make an end of this fooling.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>With all my soul, divine heavenly creature, when you please.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>He speaks like a chaplain indeed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Why, was there not soul, divine, heavenly, in what he said?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Once more, most impertinent black coat, cease your persecution, and let us have a conclusion of this ridiculous love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>I had forgot, I must suit my style to my coat, or I wear it in vain. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>I have no more patience left; let us make once an end of this troublesome love, I say.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>So be it, seraphic lady, when your honour shall think it meet and convenient so to do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>’Gad I’m sure none but a chaplain could speak so, I think.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Let me tell you, sir, this dull trick will not serve your turn; though you delay our marriage, you shall not hinder it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>Far be it from me, munificent patroness, to delay your marriage; I desire nothing more than to marry you presently, which I might do, if you yourself would; for my noble, good-natured, and thrice generous patron here would not hinder it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>No, poor man, not I, faith.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>And now, madam, let me tell you plainly nobody else shall marry you; by Heavens! I’ll die first, for I’m sure I should die after it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>How his love has made him forget his function, as I have seen it in real parsons!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>That was spoken like a chaplain too? now you understand him, I hope.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Poor man, he takes it heinously to be refused; I can’t blame him, ’tis putting an indignity upon him, not to be suffered; but you’ll pardon me, madam, it shan’t be; he shall marry us; come away, pray madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Ha! ha! he! more ado! ’tis late.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>Invincible stupidity! I tell you, he would marry me as your rival, not as your chaplain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Come, come, madam. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pulling her away.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>I pray, madam, do not refuse this reverend divine the honour and satisfaction of marrying you; for I dare say, he has set his heart upon’t, good doctor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alithea</td>
							<td>What can you hope or design by this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Harcourt</td>
							<td>I could answer her, a reprieve for a day only, often revokes a hasty doom. At worst, if she will not take mercy on me, and let me marry her, I have at least the lover’s second pleasure, hindering my rival’s enjoyment, though but for a time. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Come, madam, ’tis e’en twelve o’clock, and my mother charged me never to be married out of the canonical hours. Come, come; Lord, here’s such a deal of modesty, I warrant, the first day.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>Yes, an’t please your worship, married women show all their modesty the first day, because married men show all their love the first day.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A bedchamber in <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife’s</b> house.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</b> discovered.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Come, tell me, I say.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Lord! han’t I told it a hundred times over?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I would try, if in the repetition of the ungrateful tale, I could find her altering it in the least circumstance; for if her story be false, she is so too.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Come, how was’t, baggage?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Lord, what pleasure you take to hear it sure!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>No, you take more in telling it I find; but speak, how was’t?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>He carried me up into the house next to the Exchange.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So, and you two were only in the room!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, for he sent away a youth that was there, for some dried fruit, and China oranges.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Did he so? Damn him for it⁠—and for⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>But presently came up the gentlewoman of the house.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>O, ’twas well she did; but what did he do whilst the fruit came?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>He kissed me a hundred times, and told me he fancied he kissed my fine sister, meaning me, you know, whom he said he loved with all his soul, and bid me be sure to tell her so, and to desire her to be at her window, by eleven of the clock this morning, and he would walk under it at that time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>And he was as good as his word, very punctual; a pox reward him for’t. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Well, and he said if you were not within, he would come up to her, meaning me, you know, bud, still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> So⁠—he knew her certainly; but for this confession, I am obliged to her simplicity.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> But what, you stood very still when he kissed you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, I warrant you; would you have had me discovered myself?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>But you told me he did some beastliness to you, as you call it; what was’t?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Why, he put⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>What?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Why, he put the tip of his tongue between my lips, and so mousled me⁠—and I said, I’d bite it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>An eternal canker seize it, for a dog!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Nay, you need not be so angry with him neither, for to say truth, he has the sweetest breath I ever knew.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>The devil! you were satisfied with it then, and would do it again?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Not unless he should force me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Force you, changeling! I tell you, no woman can be forced.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, but she may sure, by such a one as he, for he’s a proper, goodly, strong man; ’tis hard, let me tell you, to resist him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> So, ’tis plain she loves him, yet she has not love enough to make her conceal it from me; but the sight of him will increase her aversion for me and love for him; and that love instruct her how to deceive me and satisfy him, all idiot as she is. Love! ’twas he gave women first their craft, their art of deluding. Out of Nature’s hands they came plain, open, silly, and fit for slaves, as she and Heaven intended ’em; but damned Love⁠—well⁠—I must strangle that little monster whilst I can deal with him.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Go fetch pen, ink, and paper out of the next room.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, bud.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Why should women have more invention in love than men? It can only be, because they have more desires, more soliciting passions, more lust, and more of the devil.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reenter <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Come, minx, sit down and write.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Ay, dear bud, but I can’t do’t very well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I wish you could not at all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>But what should I write for?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I’ll have you write a letter to your lover.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>O Lord, to the fine gentleman a letter!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, to the fine gentleman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Lord, you do but jeer: sure you jest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I am not so merry: come, write as I bid you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>What, do you think I am a fool?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> She’s afraid I would not dictate any love to him, therefore she’s unwilling.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> But you had best begin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Indeed, and indeed, but I won’t, so I won’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Why?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Because he’s in town; you may send for him if you will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Very well, you would have him brought to you; is it come to this? I say, take the pen and write, or you’ll provoke me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Lord, what d’ye make a fool of me for? Don’t I know that letters are never writ but from the country to London, and from London into the country? Now he’s in town, and I am in town too; therefore I can’t write to him, you know.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> So, I am glad it is no worse; she is innocent enough yet.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Yes, you may, when your husband bids you, write letters to people that are in town.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>O, may I so? then I’m satisfied.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Come, begin:⁠—“Sir”⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dictates.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Shan’t I say, “Dear Sir?”⁠—You know one says always something more than bare “sir.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Write as I bid you, or I will write whore with this penknife in your face.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Nay, good bud⁠—“Sir”⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>“Though I suffered last night your nauseous, loathed kisses and embraces”⁠—Write!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Nay, why should I say so? You know I told you he had a sweet breath.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Write!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Let me but put out “loathed.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Write, I say!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Well then. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Let’s see, what have you writ?⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes the paper and reads.</i> “Though I suffered last night your kisses and embraces”⁠—Thou impudent creature! where is “nauseous” and “loathed?”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I can’t abide to write such filthy words.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Once more write as I’d have you, and question it not, or I will spoil thy writing with this. I will stab out those eyes that cause my mischief. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holds up the penknife.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>O Lord! I will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So⁠—so⁠—let’s see now.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i> “Though I suffered last night your nauseous, loathed kisses and embraces”⁠—go on⁠—“yet I would not have you presume that you shall ever repeat them”⁠—so⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I have writ it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>On, then⁠—“I then concealed myself from your knowledge, to avoid your insolencies.”⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>“The same reason, now I am out of your hands⁠—” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>“Makes me own to you my unfortunate, though innocent frolic, of being in man’s clothes”⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>“That you may for evermore cease to pursue her, who hates and detests you”⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She writes on.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So⁠—heigh! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sighs.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>What, do you sigh?⁠—“detests you⁠—as much as she loves her husband and her honour⁠—”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I vow, husband, he’ll ne’er believe I should write such a letter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>What, he’d expect a kinder from you? Come, now your name only.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>What, shan’t I say “Your most faithful humble servant till death?”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>No, tormenting fiend!⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Her style, I find, would be very soft.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Come, wrap it up now whilst I go fetch wax and a candle; and write on the backside, “For <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner.” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>“For <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner.”⁠—So, I am glad he has told me his name. Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner! but why should I send thee such a letter that will vex thee, and make thee angry with me?⁠—Well, I will not send it.⁠—Ay, but then my husband will kill me⁠—for I see plainly he won’t let me love <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner⁠—but what care I for my husband?⁠—I won’t, so I won’t, send poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner such a letter⁠—But then my husband⁠—but oh, what if I writ at bottom my husband made me write it?⁠—Ay, but then my husband would see’t⁠—Can one have no shift? ah, a London woman would have had a hundred presently. Stay⁠—what if I should write a letter, and wrap it up like this, and write upon’t too? Ay, but then my husband would see’t⁠—I don’t know what to do.⁠—But yet evads I’ll try, so I will⁠—for I will not send this letter to poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner, come what will on’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>“Dear, sweet <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner”⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes and repeats what she writes.</i>⁠—so⁠—“my husband would have me send you a base, rude, unmannerly letter; but I won’t”⁠—so⁠—“and would have me forbid you loving me; but I won’t”⁠—so⁠—“and would have me say to you, I hate you, poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner; but I won’t tell a lie for him”⁠—there⁠—“for I’m sure if you and I were in the country at cards together”⁠—so⁠—“I could not help treading on your toe under the table”⁠—so⁠—“or rubbing knees with you, and staring in your face, till you saw me”⁠—very well⁠—“and then looking down, and blushing for an hour together”⁠—so⁠—“but I must make haste before my husband comes: and now he has taught me to write letters, you shall have longer ones from me, who am, dear, dear, poor, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner, your most humble friend, and servant to command till death⁠—Margery Pinchwife.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Stay, I must give him a hint at bottom⁠—so⁠—now wrap it up just like t’other⁠—so⁠—now write “For <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner”⁠—But oh now, what shall I do with it? for here comes my husband.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reenter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I have been detained by a sparkish coxcomb, who pretended a visit to me; but I fear ’twas to my wife⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> What, have you done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, bud, just now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Let’s see’t: what d’ye tremble for? what, you would not have it go?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Here⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> No, I must not give him that: so I had been served if I had given him this. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He opens and reads the first letter.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Come, where’s the wax and seal?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Lord, what shall I do now? Nay, then I have it⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Pray let me see’t. Lord, you think me so arrant a fool, I cannot seal a letter; I will do’t, so I will. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the letter from him, changes it for the other, seals it, and delivers it to him.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Nay, I believe you will learn that, and other things too, which I would not have you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>So, han’t I done it curiously?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a>⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I think I have; there’s my letter going to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner, since he’ll needs have me send letters to folks.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>’Tis very well; but I warrant, you would not have it go now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, indeed, but I would, bud, now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Well, you are a good girl then. Come, let me lock you up in your chamber, till I come back; and be sure you come not within three strides of the window when I am gone, for I have a spy in the street.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</b> locks the door.</i> At least, ’tis fit she think so. If we do not cheat women, they’ll cheat us, and fraud may be justly used with secret enemies, of which a wife is the most dangerous; and he that has a handsome one to keep, and a frontier town, must provide against treachery, rather than open force. Now I have secured all within, I’ll deal with the foe without, with false intelligence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holds up the letter. Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner’s</b> lodging</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>Well, sir, how fadges<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> the new design? have you not the luck of all your brother projectors, to deceive only yourself at last?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>No, good domine doctor, I deceive you, it seems, and others too; for the grave matrons, and old, rigid husbands think me as unfit for love, as they are; but their wives, sisters, and daughters know, some of ’em, better things already.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>Already!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Already, I say. Last night I was drunk with half-a-dozen of your civil persons, as you call ’em, and people of honour, and so was made free of their society and dressing-rooms forever hereafter; and am already come to the privileges of sleeping upon their pallets, warming smocks, tying shoes and garters, and the like, doctor, already, already, doctor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>You have made good use of your time, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>I tell thee, I am now no more interruption to ’em, when they sing, or talk bawdy, than a little squab French page who speaks no English.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>But do civil persons and women of honour drink, and sing bawdy songs?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>O, amongst friends, amongst friends. For your bigots in honour are just like those in religion; they fear the eye of the world more than the eye of Heaven; and think there is no virtue, but railing at vice, and no sin, but giving scandal. They rail at a poor, little, kept player, and keep themselves some young, modest pulpit comedian to be privy to their sins in their closets, not to tell ’em of them in their chapels.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>Nay, the truth on’t is, priests, amongst the women now, have quite got the better of us lay-confessors, physicians.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>And they are rather their patients; but⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</b>, looking about her.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Now we talk of women of honour, here comes one. Step behind the screen there, and but observe, if I have not particular privileges with the women of reputation already, doctor, already. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</b> retires.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Well, Horner, am not I a woman of honour? you see, I’m as good as my word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>And you shall see, madam, I’ll not be behindhand with you in honour; and I’ll be as good as my word too, if you please but to withdraw into the next room.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>But first, my dear sir, you must promise to have a care of my dear honour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>If you talk a word more of your honour, you’ll make me incapable to wrong it. To talk of honour in the mysteries of love, is like talking of Heaven or the Deity, in an operation of witchcraft, just when you are employing the devil: it makes the charm impotent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Nay, fy! let us not be smutty. But you talk of mysteries and bewitching to me; I don’t understand you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>I tell you, madam, the word money in a mistress’s mouth, at such a nick of time, is not a more disheartening sound to a younger brother, than that of honour to an eager lover like myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>But you can’t blame a lady of my reputation to be chary.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Chary! I have been chary of it already, by the report I have caused of myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Ay, but if you should ever let other women know that dear secret, it would come out. Nay, you must have a great care of your conduct; for my acquaintance are so censorious, (oh, ’tis a wicked, censorious world, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner!) I say, are so censorious, and detracting, that perhaps they’ll talk to the prejudice of my honour, though you should not let them know the dear secret.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Nay, madam, rather than they shall prejudice your honour, I’ll prejudice theirs; and, to serve you, I’ll lie with ’em all, make the secret their own, and then they’ll keep it. I am a Machiavel in love, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>O, no sir, not that way.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Nay, the devil take me, if censorious women are to be silenced any other way.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>A secret is better kept, I hope, by a single person than a multitude; therefore pray do not trust anybody else with it, dear, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embracing him.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper Fidget</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>How now!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> O my husband!⁠—prevented⁠—and what’s almost as bad, found with my arms about another man⁠—that will appear too much⁠—what shall I say?⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Sir Jasper, come hither: I am trying if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner were ticklish, and he’s as ticklish as can be. I love to torment the confounded toad; let you and I tickle him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>No, your ladyship will tickle him better without me, I suppose. But is this your buying china? I thought you had been at the china-house.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> China-house! that’s my cue, I must take it.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> A pox! can’t you keep your impertinent wives at home? Some men are troubled with the husbands, but I with the wives; but I’d have you to know, since I cannot be your journeyman by night, I will not be your drudge by day, to squire your wife about, and be your man of straw, or scarecrow only to pies and jays, that would be nibbling at your forbidden fruit; I shall be shortly the hackney gentleman-usher of the town.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> He! he! he! poor fellow, he’s in the right on’t, faith. To squire women about for other folks is as ungrateful an employment, as to tell money for other folks.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> He! he! he! be’n’t angry, Horner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>No, ’tis I have more reason to be angry, who am left by you, to go abroad indecently alone; or, what is more indecent, to pin myself upon such ill-bred people of your acquaintance as this is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Nay, prithee, what has he done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Nay, he has done nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>But what d’ye take ill, if he has done nothing?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Ha! ha! ha! faith, I can’t but laugh however; why, d’ye think the unmannerly toad would come down to me to the coach? I was fain to come up to fetch him, or go without him, which I was resolved not to do; for he knows china very well, and has himself very good, but will not let me see it, lest I should beg some; but I will find it out, and have what I came for yet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Apart to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</b>, as he follows her to the door.</i> Lock the door, madam.⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</b>, and locks the door.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i>⁠—So, she has got into my chamber and locked me out. Oh the impertinency of womankind! Well, Sir Jasper, plain-dealing is a jewel; if ever you suffer your wife to trouble me again here, she shall carry you home a pair of horns; by my lord mayor she shall; though I cannot furnish you myself, you are sure, yet I’ll find a way.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Ha! ha! he!⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> At my first coming in, and finding her arms about him, tickling him it seems, I was half jealous, but now I see my folly.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> He! he! he! poor Horner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Nay, though you laugh now, ’twill be my turn ere long. Oh women, more impertinent, more cunning, and more mischievous than their monkeys, and to me almost as ugly!⁠—Now is she throwing my things about and rifling all I have; but I’ll get into her the back way, and so rifle her for it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Ha! ha! ha! poor angry Horner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Stay here a little, I’ll ferret her out to you presently, I warrant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit at the other door. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</b> talks through the door to his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wife</b>, she answers from within.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Wife! my Lady Fidget! wife! he is coming in to you the back way.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Let him come, and welcome, which way he will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>He’ll catch you, and use you roughly, and be too strong for you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Don’t you trouble yourself, let him if he can.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> This indeed I could not have believed from him, nor any but my own eyes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Where’s this woman-hater, this toad, this ugly, greasy, dirty sloven?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> So, the women all will have him ugly; methinks he is a comely person, but his wants make his form contemptible to ’em; and ’tis e’en as my wife said yesterday, talking of him, that a proper handsome eunuch was as ridiculous a thing as a gigantic coward.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Sir Jasper, your servant: where is the odious beast?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>He’s within in his chamber, with my wife; she’s playing the wag with him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Is she so? and he’s a clownish beast, he’ll give her no quarter, he’ll play the wag with her again, let me tell you: come, let’s go help her⁠—What, the door’s locked?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Ay, my wife locked it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Did she so? let’s break it open then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>No, no, he’ll do her no hurt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> But is there no other way to get in to ’em? whither goes this? I will disturb ’em.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit at another door.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady Squeamish</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Where is this harlotry, this impudent baggage, this rambling tomrigg?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> O Sir Jasper, I’m glad to see you here; did you not see my vile grandchild come in hither just now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Ay, but where is she then? where is she? Lord, Sir Jasper, I have e’en rattled myself to pieces in pursuit of her: but can you tell what she makes here? they say below, no woman lodges here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>No! what does she here then? say, if it be not a woman’s lodging, what makes she here? But are you sure no woman lodges here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>No, nor no man neither, this is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner’s lodging.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Is it so, are you sure?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Yes, yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>So; then there’s no hurt in’t, I hope. But where is he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>He’s in the next room with my wife.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Nay, if you trust him with your wife, I may with my Biddy. They say, he’s a merry harmless man now, e’en as harmless a man as ever came out of Italy with a good voice, and as pretty, harmless company for a lady, as a snake without his teeth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, poor man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reenter <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>I can’t find ’em.⁠—Oh, are you here, grandmother? I followed, you must know, my Lady Fidget hither; ’tis the prettiest lodging, and I have been staring on the prettiest pictures⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reenter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</b> with a piece of china in her hand, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</b> following.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>And I have been toiling and moiling for the prettiest piece of china, my dear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Nay, she has been too hard for me, do what I could.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Oh, lord, I’ll have some china too. Good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner, don’t think to give other people china, and me none; come in with me too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Upon my honour, I have none left now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Nay, nay, I have known you deny your china before now, but you shan’t put me off so. Come.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>This lady had the last there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Yes indeed, madam, to my certain knowledge, he has no more left.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>O, but it may be he may have some you could not find.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>What, d’ye think if he had had any left, I would not have had it too? for we women of quality never think we have china enough.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Do not take it ill, I cannot make china for you all, but I will have a roll-wagon for you too, another time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Thank you, dear toad.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>What do you mean by that promise? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Alas, she has an innocent, literal understanding. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner! he has enough to do to please you all, I see.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Ay, madam, you see how they use me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Poor gentleman, I pity you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>I thank you, madam: I could never find pity, but from such reverend ladies as you are; the young ones will never spare a man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Come, come, beast, and go dine with us; for we shall want a man at ombre after dinner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>That’s all their use of me, madam, you see.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Come, sloven, I’ll lead you, to be sure of you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pulls him by the cravat.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Alas, poor man, how she tugs him! Kiss, kiss her; that’s the way to make such nice women quiet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>No, madam, that remedy is worse than the torment; they know I dare suffer anything rather than do it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Prithee kiss her, and I’ll give you her picture in little, that you admired so last night; prithee do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Well, nothing but that could bribe me: I love a woman only in effigy, and good painting as much as I hate them.⁠—I’ll do’t, for I could adore the devil well painted. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Foh, you filthy toad! nay, now I’ve done jesting.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Squeamish</td>
							<td>Ha! ha I ha! I told you so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Foh! a kiss of his⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>Has no more hurt in’t than one of my spaniel’s.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Nor no more good neither.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>I will now believe anything he tells me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>O lord, here’s a man! Sir Jasper, my mask, my mask! I would not be seen here for the world.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper</td>
							<td>What, not when I am with you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>No, no, my honour⁠—let’s be gone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</td>
							<td>Oh grandmother, let’s be gone; make haste, make haste, I know not how he may censure us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</td>
							<td>Be found in the lodging of anything like a man!⁠—Away.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Jasper Fidget</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Fidget</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady Squeamish</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Squeamish</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>What’s here? another cuckold? he looks like one, and none else sure have any business with him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Well, what brings my dear friend hither?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Your impertinency.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>My impertinency!⁠—why, you gentlemen that have got handsome wives, think you have a privilege of saying anything to your friends, and are as brutish as if you were our creditors.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>No, sir, I’ll ne’er trust you anyway.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>But why not, dear Jack? why diffide in me thou know’st so well?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Because I do know you so well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Han’t I been always thy friend, honest Jack, always ready to serve thee, in love or battle, before thou wert married, and am so still?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I believe so, you would be my second now, indeed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Well then, dear Jack, why so unkind, so grum, so strange to me? Come, prithee kiss me, dear rogue: gad I was always, I say, and am still as much thy servant as⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>As I am yours, sir. What, you would send a kiss to my wife, is that it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>So, there ’tis⁠—a man can’t show his friendship to a married man, but presently he talks of his wife to you. Prithee, let thy wife alone, and let thee and I be all one, as we were wont. What, thou art as shy of my kindness, as a Lombard-street alderman of a courtier’s civility at Locket’s!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>But you are over-kind to me, as kind as if I were your cuckold already; yet I must confess you ought to be kind and civil to me, since I am so kind, so civil to you, as to bring you this: look you there, sir. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Delivers him a letter.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>What is’t?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Only a love-letter, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>From whom?⁠—how! this is from your wife⁠—hum⁠—and hum⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Even from my wife, sir: am I not wondrous kind and civil to you now too?⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> But you’ll not think her so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Ha! is this a trick of his or hers? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>The gentleman’s surprised I find.⁠—What, you expected a kinder letter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>No faith, not I, how could I?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Yes, yes, I’m sure you did. A man so well made as you are, must needs be disappointed, if the women declare not their passion at first sight or opportunity.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> But what should this mean? Stay, the postscript.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads aside.</i> “Be sure you love me, whatsoever my husband says to the contrary, and let him not see this, lest he should come home and pinch me, or kill my squirrel.”⁠—It seems he knows not what the letter contains.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Come, ne’er wonder at it so much.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Faith, I can’t help it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Now, I think I have deserved your infinite friendship and kindness, and have showed myself sufficiently an obliging kind friend and husband; am I not so, to bring a letter from my wife to her gallant?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Ay, the devil take me, art thou, the most obliging, kind friend and husband in the world, ha! ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Well, you may be merry, sir; but in short I must tell you, sir, my honour will suffer no jesting.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>What dost thou mean?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Does the letter want a comment? Then, know, sir, though I have been so civil a husband, as to bring you a letter from my wife, to let you kiss and court her to my face, I will not be a cuckold, sir, I will not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Thou art mad with jealousy. I never saw thy wife in my life but at the play yesterday, and I know not if it were she or no. I court her, kiss her!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I will not be a cuckold, I say; there will be danger in making me a cuckold.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Why, wert thou not well cured of thy last clap?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I wear a sword.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>It should be taken from thee, lest thou shouldst do thyself a mischief with it; thou art mad, man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>As mad as I am, and as merry as you are, I must have more reason from you ere we part. I say again, though you kissed and courted last night my wife in man’s clothes, as she confesses in her letter⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Ha! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Both she and I say, you must not design it again, for you have mistaken your woman, as you have done your man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> O⁠—I understand something now⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Was that thy wife! Why wouldst thou not tell me ’twas she? Faith, my freedom with her was your fault, not mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Faith, so ’twas. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Fy! I’d never do’t to a woman before her husband’s face, sure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>But I had rather you should do’t to my wife before my face, than behind my back; and that you shall never do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>No⁠—you will hinder me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>If I would not hinder you, you see by her letter she would.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Well, I must e’en acquiesce then, and be contented with what she writes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I’ll assure you ’twas voluntarily writ; I had no hand in’t you may believe me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>I do believe thee, faith.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>And believe her too, for she’s an innocent creature, has no dissembling in her: and so fare you well, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Pray, however, present my humble service to her, and tell her, I will obey her letter to a tittle, and fulfil her desires, be what they will, or with what difficulty soever I do’t; and you shall be no more jealous of me, I warrant her, and you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Well then, fare you well; and play with any man’s honour but mine, kiss any man’s wife but mine, and welcome.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Ha! ha! ha! doctor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>It seems, he has not heard the report of you, or does not believe it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Ha! ha!⁠—now, doctor, what think you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>Pray let’s see the letter⁠—hum⁠—“for⁠—dear⁠—love you⁠—” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads the letter.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>I wonder how she could contrive it! What say’st thou to’t? ’tis an original.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quack</td>
							<td>So are your cuckolds too originals: for they are like no other common cuckolds, and I will henceforth believe it not impossible for you to cuckold the Grand Signior amidst his guards of eunuchs, that I say.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>And I say for the letter, ’tis the first love-letter that ever was without flames, darts, fates, destinies, lying and dissembling in’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</b> pulling in <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Come back, you are a pretty brother-in-law, neither go to church nor to dinner with your sister bride!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>My sister denies her marriage, and you see is gone away from you dissatisfied.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Pshaw! upon a foolish scruple, that our parson was not in lawful orders, and did not say all the common-prayer; but ’tis her modesty only I believe. But let all women be never so modest the first day, they’ll be sure to come to themselves by night, and I shall have enough of her then. In the meantime, Harry Horner, you must dine with me: I keep my wedding at my aunt’s in the Piazza.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Thy wedding! what stale maid has lived to despair of a husband, or what young one of a gallant?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>O, your servant, sir⁠—this gentleman’s sister then⁠—no stale maid.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>I’m sorry for’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>How comes he so concerned for her? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>You sorry for’t? why, do you know any ill by her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>No, I know none but by thee; ’tis for her sake, not yours, and another man’s sake that might have hoped, I thought.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Another man! another man! what is his name?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>Nay, since ’tis past, he shall be nameless.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Poor Harcourt! I am sorry thou hast missed her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>He seems to be much troubled at the match. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Prithee, tell me⁠—Nay, you shan’t go, brother.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>I must of necessity, but I’ll come to you to dinner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>But, Harry, what, have I a rival in my wife already? But with all my heart, for he may be of use to me hereafter; for though my hunger is now my sauce, and I can fall on heartily without, the time will come, when a rival will be as good sauce for a married man to a wife, as an orange to veal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>O thou damned rogue! thou hast set my teeth on edge with thy orange.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Then let’s to dinner⁠—there I was with you again. Come.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>But who dines with thee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>My friends and relations, my brother Pinchwife, you see, of your acquaintance.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>And his wife?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>No, ’gad, he’ll ne’er let her come amongst us good fellows; your stingy country coxcomb keeps his wife from his friends, as he does his little firkin of ale, for his own drinking, and a gentleman can’t get a smack on’t; but his servants, when his back is turned, broach it at their pleasures, and dust it away, ha! ha! ha!⁠—’Gad, I am witty, I think, considering I was married today, by the world; but come⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>No, I will not dine with you, unless you can fetch her too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Pshaw! what pleasure canst thou have with women now, Harry?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>My eyes are not gone; I love a good prospect yet, and will not dine with you unless she does too; go fetch her, therefore, but do not tell her husband ’tis for my sake.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Well, I’ll go try what I can do; in the meantime, come away to my aunt’s lodging, ’tis in the way to Pinchwife’s.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horner</td>
							<td>The poor woman has called for aid, and stretched forth her hand, doctor; I cannot but help her over the pale out of the briars.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A room in <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife’s</b> house.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</b> alone, leaning on her elbow.⁠—A table, pen, ink and paper.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Well, ’tis e’en so, I have got the London disease they call love; I am sick of my husband, and for my gallant. I have heard this distemper called a fever, but methinks ’tis like an ague; for when I think of my husband, I tremble, and am in a cold sweat, and have inclinations to vomit; but when I think of my gallant, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner, my hot fit comes, and I am all in a fever indeed; and, as in other fevers, my own chamber is tedious to me, and I would fain be removed to his, and then methinks I should be well. Ah, poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner! Well, I cannot, will not stay here; therefore I’ll make an end of my letter to him, which shall be a finer letter than my last, because I have studied it like anything. Oh sick, sick! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes the pen and writes.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</b>, who seeing her writing, steals softly behind her and looking over her shoulder, snatches the paper from her.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>What, writing more letters?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>O Lord, bud, why d’ye fright me so? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She offers to run out; he stops her, and reads.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>How’s this? nay, you shall not stir, madam:⁠—“Dear, dear, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horner”⁠—very well⁠—I have taught you to write letters to good purpose⁠—but let us see’t. “First, I am to beg your pardon for my boldness in writing to you, which I’d have you to know I would not have done, had not you said first you loved me so extremely, which if you do, you will never suffer me to lie in the arms of another man whom I loathe, nauseate, and detest.”⁠—Now you can write these filthy words. But what follows?⁠—“Therefore, I hope you will speedily find some way to free me from this unfortunate match, which was never, I assure you, of my choice, but I’m afraid ’tis already too far gone; however, if you love me, as I do you, you will try what you can do; but you must help me away before tomorrow, or else, alas! I shall be forever out of your reach, for I can defer no longer our⁠—our⁠—” what is to follow “our”?⁠—speak, what⁠—our journey into the country I suppose⁠—Oh woman, damned woman! and Love, damned Love, their old tempter! for this is one of his miracles; in a moment he can make those blind that could see, and those see that were blind, those dumb that could speak, and those prattle who were dumb before; nay, what is more than all, make these dough-baked, senseless, indocile animals, women, too hard for us their politic lords and rulers, in a moment. But make an end of your letter, and then I’ll make an end of you thus, and all my plagues together. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Draws his sword.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pinchwife</td>
							<td>O Lord, O Lord, you are such a passionate man, bud!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>How now, what’s here to do?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>This fool here now!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>What! drawn upon your wife? You should never do that, but at night in the dark, when you can’t hurt her. This is my sister-in-law, is it not? ay, faith, e’en our country Margery; <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pulls aside her handkerchief</i> one may know her. Come, she and you must go dine with me; dinner’s ready, come. But where’s my wife? is she not come home yet? where is she?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Making you a cuckold; ’tis that they all do, as soon as they can.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>What, the wedding-day? no, a wife that designs to make a cully of her husband will be sure to let him win the first stake of love, by the world. But come, they stay dinner for us: come, I’ll lead down our Margery.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>No⁠—sir, go, we’ll follow you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>I will not wag without you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>This coxcomb is a sensible torment to me amidst the greatest in the world. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Come, come, Madam Margery.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>No; I’ll lead her my way: what, would you treat your friends with mine, for want of your own wife?⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Leads her to the other door, and locks her in and returns.</i> I am contented my rage should take breath⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>I told Horner this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>Come now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sparkish</td>
							<td>Lord, how shy you are of your wife! but let me tell you, brother, we men of wit have amongst us a saying, that cuckolding, like the smallpox, comes with a fear; and you may keep your wife as much as you will out of danger of infection, but if her constitution incline her to’t, she’ll have it sooner or later, by the world, say they.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pinchwife</td>
							<td>
								<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> What a thing is a cuckold, that every fool can make him ridiculous!⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud.</i> Well, sir⁠—but let me advise you, now you are come to be concerned, because you suspect the danger, not to neglect the means to prevent it, especially when the greatest share of the malady will light upon your own head, for</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Hows’e’er the kind wife’s belly comes to swell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The husband breeds for her, and first is ill.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
