<h2><a name="THE_COUNTRY_WIFE" id="THE_COUNTRY_WIFE"><i>THE COUNTRY WIFE.</i></a></h2>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Indignor quidquam reprehendi, non quia crasse</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Compositum illepideve putetur, sed quia nuper:</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Nec veniam antiquis, sed honorem et præmia posci.<a name="FNanchor_69_69" id="FNanchor_69_69"></a><a href="#Footnote_69_69" class="fnanchor">[69]</a></span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 19em;"><span class="smcap">Horat.</span></span><br /><br /><br />
</p>



<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_244" id="Page_244">[Pg 244]</a></span></p>




<p><i>The Country Wife</i> was written,
according to its author's own statement,
about the year 1671 or 1672. Its production
upon the stage was subsequent to
that of <i>The Gentleman Dancing-Master</i>,
to which allusion is made in the prologue,
and antecedent to that of the earlier-written
<i>Plain Dealer</i>, in the second act of which the author
inserted some critical observations upon <i>The Country Wife</i>.
The first performance of <i>The Plain Dealer</i>, as will afterwards
appear, admits not of a later date than that of March, or the
very beginning of April, 1674; it follows then that <i>The
Country Wife</i> was brought forward some time between the
early spring of 1672 and that of 1674. It was acted by the
King's Company, established during these two years at the
theatre in Portugal Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was
published in the year 1675.</p>

<p>If we can overlook the immorality which, in this play, is
more offensive and pronounced than in any of Wycherley's
other dramas, we shall find in <i>The Country Wife</i> a brilliantly
written and skilfully constructed comedy, superior to either
of the preceding dramas from the same pen, and surpassed,
among comedies of the Restoration, only by its author's own
masterpiece, <i>The Plain Dealer</i>. The plot of <i>The Country
Wife</i> is partly based upon two comedies by Molière—<i>L'Ecole
des Femmes</i> and <i>L'Ecole des Maris</i>. From the former of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_245" id="Page_245">[Pg 245]</a></span>
these Wycherley derived his conception of the jealous man
who keeps under close restraint a young and ignorant woman,
with the vain hope of thereby securing her fidelity to him.
Agnes's innocent confessions to Arnolphe of her lover's
stratagems and her own esteem for him find a counterpart in
the Country Wife's frankness on a similar occasion, but
beyond these points of coincidence there is little resemblance
between the two plays. From <i>L'Ecole des Maris</i>, again,
Wycherley has borrowed one or two incidents: the imprisoned
girl's device of making her would-be husband (in
the English play, her actual husband) the bearer of a letter
to her gallant, and the trick by which Isabella causes her
tyrant, under the impression that she is another woman, to
consign her with his own hands to his rival.</p>

<p>Steele has published, in the <i>Tatler</i> of April 16, 1709, a
very just criticism upon this play, which, as it cannot fail to
interest the reader, I venture to subjoin.</p>

<blockquote>

<p>"Will's Coffee-house, April 14.</p>

<p>"This evening the Comedy, called <i>The Country Wife</i>, was
acted in Drury Lane, for the benefit of Mrs. Bignell. The
part which gives name to the Play was performed by herself.
Through the whole action she made a very pretty figure, and
exactly entered into the nature of the part. Her husband,
in the Drama, is represented to be one of those debauchees
who run through the vices of the town, and believe, when
they think fit, they can marry and settle at their ease. His
own knowledge of the iniquity of the age makes him choose
a wife wholly ignorant of it, and place his security in her
want of skill to abuse him. The Poet, on many occasions,
where the propriety of the character will admit of it, insinuates
that there is no defence against vice but the contempt of
it: and has, in the natural ideas of an untainted innocent,
shown the gradual steps to ruin and destruction which persons
of condition run into, without the help of a good education
to form their conduct. The torment of a jealous coxcomb,
which arises from his own false maxims, and the
aggravation of his pain by the very words in which he sees
her innocence, makes a very pleasant and instructive satire.
The character of Horner, and the design of it, is a good
representation of the age in which that Comedy was written:<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_246" id="Page_246">[Pg 246]</a></span>
at which time love and wenching were the business of life,
and the gallant manner of pursuing women was the best
recommendation at Court. To this only it is to be imputed
that a Gentleman of Mr. Wycherley's character and sense
condescends to represent the insults done to the honour of
the bed without just reproof; but to have drawn a man of
probity with regard to such considerations had been a
monster, and a Poet had at that time discovered his want of
knowing the manners of the Court he lived in, by a virtuous
character in his fine gentleman, as he would show his
ignorance by drawing a vicious one to please the present
audience."</p></blockquote>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_247" id="Page_247">[Pg 247]</a></span></p>




<h3>PROLOGUE</h3>

<h4>SPOKEN BY MR. HART.<a name="FNanchor_70_70" id="FNanchor_70_70"></a><a href="#Footnote_70_70" class="fnanchor">[70]</a></h4>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Poets, like cudgelled bullies, never do</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">At first or second blow submit to you;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But will provoke you still, and ne'er have done,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Till you are weary first with laying on.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The late so baffled scribbler of this day,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Though he stands trembling, bids me boldly say,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">What we before most plays are used to do,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">For poets out of fear first draw on you;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">In a fierce prologue the still pit defy,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And, ere you speak, like Castril<a name="FNanchor_71_71" id="FNanchor_71_71"></a><a href="#Footnote_71_71" class="fnanchor">[71]</a> give the lie.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But though our Bayes's battles oft I've fought,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And with bruised knuckles their dear conquests bought;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Nay, never yet feared odds upon the stage,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">In prologue dare not hector with the age;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But would take quarter from your saving hands,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Though Bayes within all yielding countermands,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Says, you confederate wits no quarter give,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Therefore his play shan't ask your leave to live.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Well, let the vain rash fop, by huffing so,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Think to obtain the better terms of you;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But we, the actors, humbly will submit,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Now, and at any time, to a full pit;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Nay, often we anticipate your rage,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And murder poets for you on our stage:</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">We set no guards upon our tiring-room,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But when with dying colours there you come,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">We patiently, you see, give up to you</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Our poets, virgins, nay, our matrons too.</span><br />
</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_248" id="Page_248">[Pg 248]</a></span></p>




<h3><i>DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.</i></h3>


<p>
Mr. <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.<br />
<br />
Mr. <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>.<br />
<br />
Mr. <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.<br />
<br />
Mr. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.<br />
<br />
Mr. <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.<br />
<br />
Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>.<br />
<br />
A Boy.<br />
<br />
A Quack.<br />
<br />
Waiters, Servants, and Attendants.<br />
<br />
<br />
Mrs. <span class="smcap">Margery Pinchwife</span>.<br />
<br />
<span class="smcap">Alithea</span>, Sister of <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.<br />
<br />
Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>.<br />
<br />
Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>, Sister of Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper</span>.<br />
<br />
Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.<br />
<br />
Old Lady <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.<br />
<br />
<span class="smcap">Lucy</span>, <span class="smcap">Alithea's</span> Maid.<br />
<br />
<br />
SCENE—<span class="smcap">London</span>.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_249" id="Page_249">[Pg 249]</a></span></p>




<h2><i>THE COUNTRY WIFE.</i></h2>

<h3>ACT THE FIRST.</h3>


<h4>SCENE I.—<span class="smcap">Horner's</span> <i>Lodging.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>, <i>and</i> Quack <i>following him at a distance.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] A quack is as fit for a
pimp, as a midwife for a bawd; they
are still but in their way, both helpers
of nature.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Well, my dear
doctor, hast thou done what I desired?</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> I have undone you for ever
with the women, and reported you throughout the whole
town as bad as an eunuch, with as much trouble as if
I had made you one in earnest.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But have you told all the midwives you know,
the orange wenches at the playhouses, the city husbands,
and old fumbling keepers of this end of the town? for
they'll be the readiest to report it.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> I have told all the chambermaids, waiting-women,
tire-women, and old women of my acquaintance;
nay, and whispered it as a secret to 'em, and to the
whisperers of Whitehall; so that you need not doubt
'twill spread, and you will be as odious to the handsome
young women, as—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> As the small-pox. Well—</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_250" id="Page_250">[Pg 250]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> And to the married women of this end of the
town, as—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> As the great one; nay, as their own husbands.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> And to the city dames, as aniseed Robin, of
filthy and contemptible memory; and they will frighten
their children with your name, especially their females.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And cry, Horner's coming to carry you away.
I am only afraid 'twill not be believed. You told 'em it
was by an English-French disaster, and an English-French
chirurgeon, who has given me at once not only a cure,
but an antidote for the future against that damned
malady, and that worse distemper, love, and all other
women's evils?</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Your late journey into France has made it the
more credible, and your being here a fortnight before you
appeared in public, looks as if you apprehended the
shame, which I wonder you do not. Well, I have been
hired by young gallants to belie 'em t'other way; but you
are the first would be thought a man unfit for women.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Dear Mr. Doctor, let vain rogues be contented
only to be thought abler men than they are, generally 'tis
all the pleasure they have; but mine lies another way.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> You take, methinks, a very preposterous way
to it, and as ridiculous as if we operators in physic
should put forth bills to disparage our medicaments, with
hopes to gain customers.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Doctor, there are quacks in love as well as
physic, who get but the fewer and worse patients for
their boasting; a good name is seldom got by giving it
one's self; and women, no more than honour, are compassed
by bragging. Come, come, Doctor, the wisest
lawyer never discovers the merits of his cause till the
trial; the wealthiest man conceals his riches, and the
cunning gamester his play. Shy husbands and keepers,
like old rooks, are not to be cheated but by a new unpractised
trick: false friendship will pass now no more than
false dice upon 'em; no, not in the city.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_251" id="Page_251">[Pg 251]</a></span></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Boy.</p>

<p><i>Boy.</i> There are two ladies and a gentleman coming up.
[<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> A pox! some unbelieving sisters of my former
acquaintance, who, I am afraid, expect their sense should
be satisfied of the falsity of the report. No—this formal
fool and women!</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>, Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, <i>and</i> Mrs.
<span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> His wife and sister.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> My coach breaking just now before your
door, sir, I look upon as an occasional reprimand to
me, sir, for not kissing your hands, sir, since your coming
out of France, sir; and so my disaster, sir, has been my
good fortune, sir; and this is my wife and sister, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What then, sir?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> My lady, and sister, sir.—Wife, this is Master
Horner.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Master Horner, husband!</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> My lady, my Lady Fidget, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Won't you be acquainted with her, sir?—[<i>Aside.</i>]
So, the report is true, I find, by his coldness or
aversion to the sex; but I'll play the wag with him.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Pray salute my wife, my lady, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I will kiss no man's wife, sir, for him, sir; I
have taken my eternal leave, sir, of the sex already, sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Ha! ha! ha! I'll plague him yet.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Not know my wife, sir?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I do know your wife, sir; she's a woman, sir,
and consequently a monster, sir, a greater monster than
a husband, sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> A husband! how, sir?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, sir; but I make no more cuckolds, sir.
[<i>Makes horns.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_252" id="Page_252">[Pg 252]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ha! ha! ha! Mercury! Mercury!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Pray, Sir Jasper, let us be gone from this
rude fellow.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Who, by his breeding, would think he had
ever been in France?</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Foh! he's but too much a French fellow,
such as hate women of quality and virtue for their love to
their husbands. Sir Jasper, a woman is hated by 'em as
much for loving her husband as for loving their money.
But pray let's be gone.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> You do well, madam; for I have nothing that
you came for. I have brought over not so much as a
bawdy picture, no new postures, nor the second part of
the <i>Ecole des Filles</i>; nor—</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Hold, for shame, sir! what d'ye mean? you'll
ruin yourself for ever with the sex—[<i>Apart to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ha! ha! ha! he hates women perfectly, I
find.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> What pity 'tis he should!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Ay, he's a base fellow for't. But affectation
makes not a woman more odious to them than virtue.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Because your virtue is your greatest affectation,
madam.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> How, you saucy fellow! would you wrong
my honour?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> If I could.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> How d'ye mean, sir?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ha! ha! ha! no, he can't wrong your ladyship's
honour, upon my honour. He, poor man—hark
you in your ear—a mere eunuch. [<i>Whispers.</i></p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> O filthy French beast! foh! foh! why do
we stay? let's be gone: I can't endure the sight of him.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Stay but till the chairs come; they'll be here
presently.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> No, no.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nor can I stay longer. 'Tis, let me see, a
quarter and half quarter of a minute past eleven. The<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_253" id="Page_253">[Pg 253]</a></span>
council will be sat; I must away. Business must be
preferred always before love and ceremony with the wise,
Mr. Horner.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And the impotent, Sir Jasper.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, ay, the impotent, Master Horner; hah!
hah! hah!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> What, leave us with a filthy man alone in his
lodgings?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He's an innocent man now, you know. Pray
stay, I'll hasten the chairs to you.—Mr. Horner, your
servant; I should be glad to see you at my house. Pray
come and dine with me, and play at cards with my wife
after dinner; you are fit for women at that game yet, ha!
ha!—[<i>Aside.</i>] 'Tis as much a husband's prudence to
provide innocent diversion for a wife as to hinder her
unlawful pleasures; and he had better employ her than
let her employ herself.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Farewell.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Your servant, Sir Jasper. [<i>Exit</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper</span>.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> I will not stay with him, foh!—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, madam, I beseech you stay, if it be but to
see I can be as civil to ladies yet as they would desire.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> No, no, foh! you cannot be civil to ladies.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> You as civil as ladies would desire?</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> No, no, no, foh! foh! foh!
[<i>Exeunt</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Now, I think, I, or you yourself, rather, have
done your business with the women.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Thou art an ass. Don't you see already, upon
the report, and my carriage, this grave man of business
leaves his wife in my lodgings, invites me to his house
and wife, who before would not be acquainted with me
out of jealousy?</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Nay, by this means you may be the more
acquainted with the husbands, but the less with the
wives.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Let me alone; if I can but abuse the husbands,
I'll soon disabuse the wives. Stay—I'll reckon you up<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_254" id="Page_254">[Pg 254]</a></span>
the advantages I am like to have by my stratagem.
First, I shall be rid of all my old acquaintances, the most
insatiable sort of duns, that invade our lodgings in a
morning; and next to the pleasure of making a new
mistress is that of being rid of an old one, and of all old
debts. Love, when it comes to be so, is paid the most
unwillingly.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Well, you may be so rid of your old acquaintances;
but how will you get any new ones?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Doctor, thou wilt never make a good chemist,
thou art so incredulous and impatient. Ask but all the
young fellows of the town if they do not lose more time,
like huntsmen, in starting the game, than in running it
down. One knows not where to find 'em; who will or
will not. Women of quality are so civil, you can hardly
distinguish love from good breeding, and a man is often
mistaken: but now I can be sure she that shows an
aversion to me loves the sport, as those women that are
gone, whom I warrant to be right. And then the next
thing is, your women of honour, as you call 'em, are only
chary of their reputations, not their persons; and 'tis
scandal they would avoid, not men. Now may I have,
by the reputation of an eunuch, the privileges of one, and
be seen in a lady's chamber in a morning as early as her
husband; kiss virgins before their parents or lovers; and
may be, in short, the <i>passe-partout</i> of the town. Now,
doctor.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Nay, now you shall be the doctor; and your
process is so new that we do not know but it may
succeed.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Not so new neither; <i>probatum est</i>, doctor.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Well, I wish you luck, and many patients,
whilst I go to mine. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Come, your appearance at the play yesterday, has,
I hope, hardened you for the future against the women's<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_255" id="Page_255">[Pg 255]</a></span>
contempt, and the men's raillery; and now you'll abroad
as you were wont.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Did I not bear it bravely?</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> With a most theatrical impudence, nay, more
than the orange-wenches show there, or a drunken vizard-mask,
or a great-bellied actress; nay, or the most impudent
of creatures, an ill poet; or what is yet more
impudent, a second-hand critic.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But what say the ladies? have they no pity?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> What ladies? The vizard-masks, you know,
never pity a man when all's gone, though in their service.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> And for the women in the boxes, you'd never pity
them when 'twas in your power.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> They say 'tis pity but all that deal with common
women should be served so.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Nay, I dare swear they won't admit you to play
at cards with them, go to plays with 'em, or do the little
duties which other shadows of men are wont to do for 'em.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What do you call shadows of men?</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Half-men.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What, boys?</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Ay, your old boys, old <i>beaux garçons</i>, who, like
superannuated stallions, are suffered to run, feed, and
whinny with the mares as long as they live, though they
can do nothing else.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, a pox on love and wenching! Women
serve but to keep a man from better company. Though
I can't enjoy them, I shall you the more. Good fellowship
and friendship are lasting, rational, and manly
pleasures.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> For all that, give me some of those pleasures you
call effeminate too; they help to relish one another.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> They disturb one another.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, mistresses are like books. If you pore upon
them too much, they doze you, and make you unfit for
company; but if used discreetly, you are the fitter for conversation
by 'em.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_256" id="Page_256">[Pg 256]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> A mistress should be like a little country retreat
near the town; not to dwell in constantly, but only for a
night and away, to taste the town the better when a man
returns.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I tell you, 'tis as hard to be a good fellow, a
good friend, and a lover of women, as 'tis to be a good
fellow, a good friend, and a lover of money. You cannot
follow both, then choose your side. Wine gives you
liberty, love takes it away.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Gad, he's in the right on't.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Wine gives you joy; love, grief and tortures,
besides surgeons. Wine makes us witty; love, only sots.
Wine makes us sleep; love breaks it.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> By the world he has reason, Harcourt.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Wine makes—</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Ay, wine makes us—makes us princes; love
makes us beggars, poor rogues, egad—and wine—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, there's one converted.—No, no, love and
wine, oil and vinegar.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I grant it; love will still be uppermost.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Come, for my part, I will have only those
glorious manly pleasures of being very drunk and very
slovenly.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Boy.</p>

<p><i>Boy.</i> Mr. Sparkish is below, sir. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> What, my dear friend! a rogue that is fond of me
only, I think, for abusing him.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> No, he can no more think the men laugh at him
than that women jilt him; his opinion of himself is so
good.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, there's another pleasure by drinking I
thought not of,—I shall lose his acquaintance, because
he cannot drink: and you know 'tis a very hard thing to
be rid of him; for he's one of those nauseous offerers at
wit, who, like the worst fiddlers, run themselves into all
companies.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_257" id="Page_257">[Pg 257]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> One that, by being in the company of men of
sense, would pass for one.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And may so to the short-sighted world; as a
false jewel amongst true ones is not discerned at a distance.
His company is as troublesome to us as a cuckold's when
you have a mind to his wife's.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, the rogue will not let us enjoy one another,
but ravishes our conversation; though he signifies no
more to't than Sir Martin Mar-all's<a name="FNanchor_72_72" id="FNanchor_72_72"></a><a href="#Footnote_72_72" class="fnanchor">[72]</a> gaping, and awkward
thrumming upon the lute, does to his man's voice and
music.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> And to pass for a wit in town shows himself a
fool every night to us, that are guilty of the plot.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Such wits as he are, to a company of reasonable
men, like rooks to the gamesters; who only fill a room
at the table, but are so far from contributing to the play,
that they only serve to spoil the fancy of those that do.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Nay, they are used like rooks too, snubbed,
checked, and abused; yet the rogues will hang on.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> A pox on 'em, and all that force nature, and
would be still what she forbids 'em! Affectation is her
greatest monster.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Most men are the contraries to that they would
seem. Your bully, you see, is a coward with a long
sword; the little humbly-fawning physician, with his
ebony cane, is he that destroys men.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> The usurer, a poor rogue, possessed of mouldy
bonds and mortgages; and we they call spendthrifts,
are only wealthy, who lay out his money upon daily new
purchases of pleasure.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, your arrantest cheat is your trustee or
executor; your jealous man, the greatest cuckold; your<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_258" id="Page_258">[Pg 258]</a></span>
churchman the greatest atheist; and your noisy pert
rogue of a wit, the greatest fop, dullest ass, and worst
company, as you shall see; for here he comes.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How is't, sparks? how is't? Well, faith,
Harry, I must rally thee a little, ha! ha! ha! upon the
report in town of thee, ha! ha! ha! I can't hold i'faith;
shall I speak?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes; but you'll be so bitter then.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Honest Dick and Frank here shall answer for
me; I will not be extreme bitter, by the universe.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> We will be bound in a ten thousand pound bond,
he shall not be bitter at all.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Nor sharp, nor sweet.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What, not downright insipid?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay then, since you are so brisk, and provoke
me, take what follows. You must know, I was discoursing
and rallying with some ladies yesterday, and they happened
to talk of the fine new signs in town—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Very fine ladies, I believe.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Said I, I know where the best new sign is.—Where?
says one of the ladies.—In Covent-Garden, I
replied.—Said another, In what street?—In Russel-street,
answered I.—Lord, says another, I'm sure there
was never a fine new sign there yesterday.—Yes, but
there was, said I again; and it came out of France, and
has been there a fortnight.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> A pox! I can hear no more, prithee.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, hear him out; let him tune his crowd
a while.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> The worst music, the greatest preparation.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, faith, I'll make you laugh.—It cannot be,
says a third lady.—Yes, yes, quoth I again.—Says a
fourth lady—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Look to't, we'll have no more ladies.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No—then mark, mark, now. Said I to the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_259" id="Page_259">[Pg 259]</a></span>
fourth, Did you never see Mr. Horner? he lodges in
Russel-street, and he's a sign of a man, you know,
since he came out of France; ha! ha! ha!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But the devil take me if thine be the sign of a
jest.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> With that they all fell a-laughing, till they bepissed
themselves. What, but it does not move you, methinks?
Well, I see one had as good go to law without
a witness, as break a jest without a laugher on one's side.—Come,
come, sparks, but where do we dine? I have
left at Whitehall an earl, to dine with you.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Why, I thought thou hadst loved a man with a
title, better than a suit with a French trimming to't.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Go to him again.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, sir, a wit to me is the greatest title in the
world.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But go dine with your earl, sir; he may be exception.
We are your friends, and will not take it ill to
be left, I do assure you.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Nay, faith, he shall go to him.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, pray, gentlemen.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> We'll thrust you out, if you won't; what, disappoint
anybody for us?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, dear gentlemen, hear me.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, no, sir, by no means; pray go, sir.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Why, dear rogues—</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> No, no. [<i>They all thrust him out of the room.</i></p>

<p><i>All.</i> Ha! ha! ha!</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> But, sparks, pray hear me. What, d'ye think
I'll eat then with gay shallow fops and silent coxcombs? I
think wit as necessary at dinner, as a glass of good wine;
and that's the reason I never have any stomach when I
eat alone.—Come, but where do we dine?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Even where you will.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> At Chateline's?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_260" id="Page_260">[Pg 260]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Yes, if you will.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Or at the Cock?<a name="FNanchor_73_73" id="FNanchor_73_73"></a><a href="#Footnote_73_73" class="fnanchor">[73]</a></p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Yes, if you please.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Or at the Dog and Partridge?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, if you have a mind to't; for we shall dine
at neither.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! with your fooling we shall lose the new
play; and I would no more miss seeing a new play the
first day, than I would miss sitting in the wit's row.
Therefore I'll go fetch my mistress, and away. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Who have we here? Pinchwife?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Gentlemen, your humble servant.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, Jack, by thy long absence from the town,
the grumness of thy countenance, and the slovenliness
of thy habit, I should give thee joy, should I not, of
marriage?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Death! does he know I'm married
too? I thought to have concealed it from him at least.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
My long stay in the country will excuse my
dress; and I have a suit of law that brings me up to
town, that puts me out of humour. Besides, I must give
Sparkish to-morrow five thousand pounds to lie with my
sister.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, you country gentlemen, rather than not
purchase, will buy anything; and he is a cracked title,
if we may quibble. Well, but am I to give thee joy? I
heard thou wert married.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What then?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, the next thing that is to be heard, is,
thou'rt a cuckold.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_261" id="Page_261">[Pg 261]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Insupportable name! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But I did not expect marriage from such a
whoremaster as you; one that knew the town so much,
and women so well.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Why, I have married no London wife.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Pshaw! that's all one. That grave circumspection
in marrying a country wife, is like refusing a
deceitful pampered Smithfield jade, to go and be cheated
by a friend in the country.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] A pox on him and his simile!—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
At least we are a little surer of the breed there, know
what her keeping has been, whether foiled or unsound.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Come, come, I have known a clap gotten in
Wales; and there are cousins, justices' clerks, and chaplains
in the country, I won't say coachmen. But she's
handsome and young?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] I'll answer as I should do.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
No, no; she has no beauty but her youth, no attraction
but her modesty: wholesome, homely, and huswifely;
that's all.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> He talks as like a grazier as he looks.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> She's too awkward, ill-favoured, and silly to bring
to town.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Then methinks you should bring her to be
taught breeding.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> To be taught! no, sir, I thank you. Good
wives and private soldiers should be ignorant—I'll keep
her from your instructions, I warrant you.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> The rogue is as jealous as if his wife were not
ignorant. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, if she be ill-favoured, there will be less
danger here for you than by leaving her in the country.
We have such variety of dainties that we are seldom
hungry.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> But they have always coarse, constant, swingeing
stomachs in the country.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Foul feeders indeed!</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_262" id="Page_262">[Pg 262]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> And your hospitality is great there.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Open house; every man's welcome.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So, so, gentlemen.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But prithee, why shouldst thou marry her? If
she be ugly, ill-bred, and silly, she must be rich then.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> As rich as if she brought me twenty thousand
pound out of this town; for she'll be as sure not to spend
her moderate portion, as a London baggage would be to
spend hers, let it be what it would: so 'tis all one. Then,
because she's ugly, she's the likelier to be my own; and
being ill-bred, she'll hate conversation; and since silly
and innocent, will not know the difference betwixt a man
of one-and-twenty and one of forty.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nine—to my knowledge. But if she be silly,
she'll expect as much from a man of forty-nine, as from
him of one-and-twenty. But methinks wit is more necessary
than beauty; and I think no young woman ugly that
has it, and no handsome woman agreeable without it.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Tis my maxim, he's a fool that marries; but
he's a greater that does not marry a fool. What is wit in
a wife good for, but to make a man a cuckold?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes, to keep it from his knowledge.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> A fool cannot contrive to make her husband a
cuckold.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No; but she'll club with a man that can: and
what is worse, if she cannot make her husband a cuckold,
she'll make him jealous, and pass for one: and then 'tis
all one.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, well, I'll take care for one. My wife
shall make me no cuckold, though she had your help,
Mr. Horner. I understand the town, sir.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> His help! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> He's come newly to town, it seems, and has not
heard how things are with him. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But tell me, has marriage cured thee of whoring,
which it seldom does?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> 'Tis more than age can do.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_263" id="Page_263">[Pg 263]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, the word is, I'll marry and live honest: but
a marriage vow is like a penitent gamester's oath, and
entering into bonds and penalties to stint himself to such
a particular small sum at play for the future, which makes
him but the more eager; and not being able to hold out,
loses his money again, and his forfeit to boot.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Ay, ay, a gamester will be a gamester whilst his
money lasts, and a whoremaster whilst his vigour.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Nay, I have known 'em, when they are broke,
and can lose no more, keep a fumbling with the box in
their hands to fool with only, and hinder other gamesters.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> That had wherewithal to make lusty stakes.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, gentlemen, you may laugh at me; but
you shall never lie with my wife: I know the town.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But prithee, was not the way you were in
better? is not keeping better than marriage?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> A pox on't! the jades would jilt me, I could
never keep a whore to myself.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, then you only married to keep a whore to
yourself. Well, but let me tell you, women, as you say,
are like soldiers, made constant and loyal by good pay,
rather than by oaths and covenants. Therefore I'd
advise my friends to keep rather than marry, since too
I find, by your example, it does not serve one's turn; for
I saw you yesterday in the eighteenpenny place with a
pretty country-wench.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How the devil! did he see my wife then? I
sat there that she might not be seen. But she shall
never go to a play again. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What! dost thou blush, at nine-and-forty, for
having been seen with a wench?</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> No, faith, I warrant 'twas his wife, which he
seated there out of sight; for he's a cunning rogue, and
understands the town.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> He blushes. Then 'twas his wife; for men are
now more ashamed to be seen with them in public than
with a wench.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_264" id="Page_264">[Pg 264]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Hell and damnation! I'm undone, since
Horner has seen her, and they know 'twas she.
[<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But prithee, was it thy wife? She was exceeding
pretty: I was in love with her at that distance.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> You are like never to be nearer to her. Your
servant, gentlemen. [<i>Offers to go.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, prithee stay.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I cannot; I will not.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Come, you shall dine with us.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I have dined already.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Come, I know thou hast not: I'll treat thee,
dear rogue; thou sha't spend none of thy Hampshire
money to-day.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Treat me! So, he uses me already like his
cuckold. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, you shall not go.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I must; I have business at home. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> To beat his wife. He's as jealous of her, as a
Cheapside husband of a Covent-garden wife.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, 'tis as hard to find an old whoremaster
without jealousy and the gout, as a young one without
fear, or the pox:—</p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">As gout in age from pox in youth proceeds,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">So wenching past, then jealousy succeeds;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The worst disease that love and wenching breeds.</span><br />
</p>

<p>[<i>Exeunt.</i></p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_265" id="Page_265">[Pg 265]</a></span></p>




<h3>ACT THE SECOND.</h3>


<h4>SCENE I <i>.—A Room in</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife's</span> <i>House.</i></h4>

<p class="center">Mrs. <span class="smcap">Margery Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea. Pinchwife</span>
<i>peeping behind at the door.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray, sister, where are the
best fields and woods to walk in, in
London?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] A pretty question!—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Why, sister, Mulberry-garden
and St. James's park; and, for
close walks, the New Exchange.<a name="FNanchor_74_74" id="FNanchor_74_74"></a><a href="#Footnote_74_74" class="fnanchor">[74]</a></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray, sister, tell me why my husband
looks so grum here in town, and keeps me up so close,
and will not let me go a-walking, nor let me wear my best
gown yesterday.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> O, he's jealous, sister.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Jealous! what's that?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> He's afraid you should love another man.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> How should he be afraid of my loving
another man, when he will not let me see any but
himself?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Did he not carry you yesterday to a play?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Ay; but we sat amongst ugly people.
He would not let me come near the gentry, who sat under
us, so that I could not see 'em. He told me, none but
naughty women sat there, whom they toused and moused.
But I would have ventured, for all that.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_266" id="Page_266">[Pg 266]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> But how did you like the play?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Indeed I was weary of the play; but I
liked hugeously the actors. They are the goodliest,
properest men, sister!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> O, but you must not like the actors, sister.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Ay, how should I help it, sister? Pray,
sister, when my husband comes in, will you ask leave for
me to go a-walking?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> A-walking! ha! ha! Lord, a country-gentlewoman's
pleasure is the drudgery of a footpost; and she
requires as much airing as her husband's horses.—[<i>Aside.</i>]
But here comes your husband: I'll ask, though I'm sure
he'll not grant it.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> He says he won't let me go abroad for
fear of catching the pox.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Fy! the small-pox you should say.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O my dear, dear bud, welcome home!
Why dost thou look so fropish? who has nangered thee?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> You're a fool.
[Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>goes aside, and cries.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Faith, so she is, for crying for no fault, poor
tender creature!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, you would have her as impudent as
yourself, as arrant a jilflirt, a gadder, a magpie; and to
say all, a mere notorious town-woman?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Brother, you are my only censurer; and the
honour of your family will sooner suffer in your wife there
than in me, though I take the innocent liberty of the
town.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Hark you, mistress, do not talk so before my
wife.—The innocent liberty of the town!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Why, pray, who boasts of any intrigue with me?
what lampoon has made my name notorious? what ill
women frequent my lodgings? I keep no company with
any women of scandalous reputations.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_267" id="Page_267">[Pg 267]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, you keep the men of scandalous reputations
company.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Where? would you not have me civil? answer
'em in a box at the plays, in the drawing-room at
Whitehall, in St James'-park, Mulberry-garden, or—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Hold, hold! Do not teach my wife where the
men are to be found: I believe she's the worse for your
town-documents already. I bid you keep her in ignorance,
as I do.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Indeed, be not angry with her, bud, she
will tell me nothing of the town, though I ask her a
thousand times a day.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Then you are very inquisitive to know, I
find?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Not I indeed, dear; I hate London.
Our place-house in the country is worth a thousand of't:
would I were there again!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So you shall, I warrant. But were you not
talking of plays and players when I came in?—[<i>To</i>
<span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.] You are her encourager in such discourses.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> No, indeed, dear; she chid me just now
for liking the playermen.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Nay, if she be so innocent as to own to
me her liking them, there is no hurt in't.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Come, my poor rogue, but thou likest none better than
me?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, indeed, but I do. The playermen
are finer folks.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But you love none better than me?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> You are my own dear bud, and I know
you. I hate a stranger.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Ay, my dear, you must love me only; and not
be like the naughty town-women, who only hate their
husbands, and love every man else; love plays, visits,
fine coaches, fine clothes, fiddles, balls, treats, and so
lead a wicked town-life.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_268" id="Page_268">[Pg 268]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, if to enjoy all these things be a
town-life, London is not so bad a place, dear.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How! if you love me, you must hate London.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> The fool has forbid me discovering to her the
pleasures of the town, and he is now setting her agog
upon them himself. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> But, husband, do the town-women love
the playermen too?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Yes, I warrant you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Ay, I warrant you.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Why, you do not, I hope?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> No, no, bud. But why have we no playermen
in the country?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Ha!—Mrs. Minx, ask me no more to go to a
play.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, why, love? I did not care for going:
but when you forbid me, you make me, as 'twere, desire
it.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> So 'twill be in other things, I warrant. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray let me go to a play, dear.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Hold your peace, I wo' not.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Why, love?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Why, I'll tell you.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Nay, if he tell her, she'll give him more cause
to forbid her that place. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray why, dear?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> First, you like the actors; and the gallants may
like you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What, a homely country girl! No, bud,
nobody will like me.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I tell you yes, they may.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> No, no, you jest—I won't believe you:
I will go.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I tell you then, that one of the lewdest fellows
in town, who saw you there, told me he was in love with
you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Indeed! who, who, pray who was't?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_269" id="Page_269">[Pg 269]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I've gone too far, and slipped before I was
aware; how overjoyed she is! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Was it any Hampshire gallant, any of our
neighbours? I promise you, I am beholden to him.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I promise you, you lie; for he would but ruin
you, as he has done hundreds. He has no other love
for women but that; such as he look upon women, like
basilisks, but to destroy 'em.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch</i> Ay, but if he loves me, why should he
ruin me? answer me to that. Methinks he should not,
I would do him no harm.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Ha! ha! ha!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Tis very well; but I'll keep him from doing
you any harm, or me either. But here comes company;
get you in, get you in.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> But, pray, husband, is he a pretty gentleman
that loves me?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> In, baggage, in.
[<i>Thrusts her in, and shuts the door.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>.</p>

<p>What, all the lewd libertines of the town brought to my
lodging by this easy coxcomb! 'sdeath, I'll not suffer it.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Here, Harcourt, do you approve my choice?—[<i>To</i>
<span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.] Dear little rogue, I told you I'd bring
you acquainted with all my friends, the wits and—[<span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>
<i>salutes her.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Ay, they shall know her, as well as you yourself
will, I warrant you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> This is one of those, my pretty rogue, that are
to dance at your wedding to-morrow; and him you must
bid welcome ever, to what you and I have.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Monstrous! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Harcourt, how dost thou like her, faith? Nay,
dear, do not look down; I should hate to have a wife of
mine out of countenance at anything.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Wonderful! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_270" id="Page_270">[Pg 270]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Tell me, I say, Harcourt, how dost thou like
her? Thou hast stared upon her enough, to resolve
me.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> So infinitely well, that I could wish I had a
mistress too, that might differ from her in nothing but
her love and engagement to you.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Sir, Master Sparkish has often told me that
his acquaintance were all wits and raillieurs, and now I
find it.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, by the universe, madam, he does not rally
now; you may believe him. I do assure you, he is the
honestest, worthiest, true-hearted gentlemen—a man of
such perfect honour, he would say nothing to a lady he
does not mean.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Praising another man to his mistress! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Sir, you are so beyond expectation obliging,
that—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, egad, I am sure you do admire her extremely;
I see't in your eyes.—He does admire you,
madam.—By the world, don't you?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Yes, above the world, or the most glorious part
of it, her whole sex: and till now I never thought I
should have envied you, or any man about to marry,
but you have the best excuse for marriage I ever knew.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Nay, now, sir, I'm satisfied you are of the society
of the wits and raillieurs, since you cannot spare your
friend, even when he is but too civil to you; but the
surest sign is, since you are an enemy to marriage,—for
that I hear you hate as much as business or bad
wine.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Truly, madam, I was never an enemy to marriage
till now, because marriage was never an enemy to me
before.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> But why, sir, is marriage an enemy to you now?
because it robs you of your friend here? for you look
upon a friend married, as one gone into a monastery,
that is, dead to the world.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_271" id="Page_271">[Pg 271]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> 'Tis indeed, because you marry him; I see,
madam, you can guess my meaning. I do confess
heartily and openly, I wish it were in my power to break
the match; by Heavens I would.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Poor Frank!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Would you be so unkind to me?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, no, 'tis not because I would be unkind to
you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Poor Frank! no gad, 'tis only his kindness to
me.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Great kindness to you indeed! Insensible fop,
let a man make love to his wife to his face! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, dear Frank, for all my wife there, that
shall be, thou shalt enjoy me sometimes, dear rogue.
By my honour, we men of wit condole for our deceased
brother in marriage, as much as for one dead in earnest:
I think that was prettily said of me, ha, Harcourt?—But
come, Frank, be not melancholy for me.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, I assure you, I am not melancholy for you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Prithee, Frank, dost think my wife that shall
be there, a fine person?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I could gaze upon her till I became as blind as
you are.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How as I am? how?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Because you are a lover, and true lovers are
blind, stock blind.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> True, true; but by the world she has wit too,
as well as beauty: go, go with her into a corner, and
try if she has wit; talk to her anything, she's bashful
before me.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Indeed if a woman wants wit in a corner, she
has it nowhere.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Sir, you dispose of me a little before your
time—[<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, nay, madam, let me have an earnest of
your obedience, or—go, go, madam—[<span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>
<i>courts</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>aside.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_272" id="Page_272">[Pg 272]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How, sir! if you are not concerned for the
honour of a wife, I am for that of a sister; he shall not
debauch her. Be a pander to your own wife! bring men
to her! let 'em make love before your face! thrust 'em
into a corner together, then leave 'em in private! is this
your town wit and conduct?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ha! ha! ha! a silly wise rogue would make
one laugh more than a stark fool, ha! ha! I shall burst.
Nay, you shall not disturb 'em; I'll vex thee, by the world.
[<i>Struggles with</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>to keep him from</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> The writings are drawn, sir, settlements made;
'tis too late, sir, and past all revocation.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Then so is my death.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I would not be unjust to him.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Then why to me so?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I have no obligation to you.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> My love.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I had his before.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> You never had it; he wants, you see, jealousy,
the only infallible sign of it.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Love proceeds from esteem; he cannot distrust
my virtue: besides, he loves me, or he would not marry
me.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Marrying you is no more sign of his love than
bribing your woman, that he may marry you, is a sign of
his generosity. Marriage is rather a sign of interest than
love; and he that marries a fortune covets a mistress, not
loves her. But if you take marriage for a sign of love,
take it from me immediately.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> No, now you have put a scruple in my head;
but in short, sir, to end our dispute, I must marry him,
my reputation would suffer in the world else.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No; if you do marry him, with your pardon,
madam, your reputation suffers in the world, and you
would be thought in necessity for a cloak.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Nay, now you are rude, sir.—Mr. Sparkish,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_273" id="Page_273">[Pg 273]</a></span>
pray come hither, your friend here is very troublesome,
and very loving.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Hold! hold!—[<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> D'ye hear that?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Why, d'ye think I'll seem to be jealous, like a
country bumpkin?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, rather be a cuckold, like a credulous cit.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Madam, you would not have been so little
generous as to have told him.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Yes, since you could be so little generous as to
wrong him.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Wrong him! no man can do't, he's beneath an
injury: a bubble, a coward, a senseless idiot, a wretch so
contemptible to all the world but you, that—</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Hold, do not rail at him, for since he is like to
be my husband, I am resolved to like him: nay, I think
I am obliged to tell him you are not his friend.—Master
Sparkish, Master Sparkish!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> What, what?—[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>.] Now, dear
rogue, has not she wit?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Not so much as I thought, and hoped she had.
[<i>Speaks surlily.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Mr. Sparkish, do you bring people to rail at you?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Madam—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How! no; but if he does rail at me, 'tis but in
jest, I warrant: what we wits do for one another, and
never take any notice of it.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> He spoke so scurrilously of you, I had no
patience to hear him; besides, he has been making love
to me.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> True, damned tell-tale woman! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! to show his parts—we wits rail and
make love often, but to show our parts: as we have no
affections, so we have no malice, we—</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> He said you were a wretch below an injury—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw!</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Damned, senseless, impudent, virtuous jade!<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_274" id="Page_274">[Pg 274]</a></span>
Well, since she won't let me have her, she'll do as good,
she'll make me hate her. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> A common bubble—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> A coward—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw, pshaw!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> A senseless, drivelling idiot—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How! did he disparage my parts? Nay, then,
my honour's concerned, I can't put up that, sir, by the
world—brother, help me to kill him—[<i>Aside</i>] I may draw
now, since we have the odds of him:—'tis a good
occasion, too, before my mistress—[<i>Offers to draw.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Hold, hold!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> What, what?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] I must not let 'em kill the gentleman
neither, for his kindness to me: I am so far from hating
him, that I wish my gallant had his person and understanding.
Nay, if my honour—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> I'll be thy death.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Hold, hold! Indeed, to tell the truth, the
gentleman said after all, that what he spoke was but out
of friendship to you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How! say, I am, I am a fool, that is, no wit,
out of friendship to me?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Yes, to try whether I was concerned enough
for you; and made love to me only to be satisfied of my
virtue, for your sake.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Kind, however. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, if it were so, my dear rogue, I ask thee
pardon; but why would not you tell me so, faith?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Because I did not think on't, faith.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, Horner does not come; Harcourt, let's
be gone to the new play.—Come, madam.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I will not go, if you intend to leave me alone in
the box, and run into the pit, as you use to do.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! I'll leave Harcourt with you in the
box to entertain you, and that's as good; if I sat in the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_275" id="Page_275">[Pg 275]</a></span>
box, I should be thought no judge but of trimmings.—Come
away, Harcourt, lead her down.
[<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish, Harcourt</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, go thy ways, for the flower of the true
town fops, such as spend their estates before they come
to 'em, and are cuckolds before they're married. But
let me go look to my own freehold.—How!</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>, <i>and</i> Mrs.
<span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Your servant, sir: where is your lady? We
are come to wait upon her to the new play.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> New play!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> And my husband will wait upon you
presently.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Damn your civility.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Madam,
by no means; I will not see Sir Jasper here, till I have
waited upon him at home; nor shall my wife see you till
she has waited upon your ladyship at your lodgings.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Now we are here, sir?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, Madam.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Pray, let us see her.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> We will not stir till we see her.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] A pox on you all!—[<i>Goes to the door,
and returns.</i>] She has locked the door, and is gone
abroad.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> No, you have locked the door, and she's
within.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> They told us below she was here.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Will nothing do?—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Well, it
must out then. To tell you the truth, ladies, which I was
afraid to let you know before, lest it might endanger your
lives, my wife has just now the small-pox come out upon
her; do not be frightened; but pray be gone, ladies;
you shall not stay here in danger of your lives; pray get
you gone, ladies.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> No, no, we have all had 'em.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_276" id="Page_276">[Pg 276]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Alack, alack!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Come, come, we must see how it goes with
her; I understand the disease.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Come!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Well, there is no being too hard for
women at their own weapon, lying, therefore I'll quit the
field. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Here's an example of jealousy!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Indeed, as the world goes, I wonder there
are no more jealous, since wives are so neglected.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Pshaw! as the world goes, to what end
should they be jealous?</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Foh! 'tis a nasty world.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> That men of parts, great acquaintance,
and quality, should take up with and spend themselves
and fortunes in keeping little playhouse creatures, foh!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Nay, that women of understanding, great
acquaintance, and good quality, should fall a-keeping too
of little creatures, foh!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Why, 'tis the men of quality's fault; they
never visit women of honour and reputation as they used
to do; and have not so much as common civility for
ladies of our rank, but use us with the same indifferency
and ill-breeding as if we were all married to 'em.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> She says true; 'tis an arrant shame women
of quality should be so slighted; methinks birth—birth
should go for something; I have known men admired,
courted, and followed for their titles only.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Ay, one would think men of honour
should not love, no more than marry, out of their own
rank.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Fy, fy, upon 'em! they are come to think
cross breeding for themselves best, as well as for their dogs
and horses.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> They are dogs and horses for't.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> One would think, if not for love, for
vanity a little.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_277" id="Page_277">[Pg 277]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Nay, they do satisfy their vanity upon us
sometimes; and are kind to us in their report, tell all the
world they lie with us.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Damned rascals, that we should be only
wronged by 'em! To report a man has had a person,
when he has not had a person, is the greatest wrong in
the whole world that can be done to a person.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Well, 'tis an arrant shame noble persons
should be so wronged and neglected.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But still 'tis an arranter shame for a noble
person to neglect her own honour, and defame her own
noble person with little inconsiderable fellows, foh!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> I suppose the crime against our honour is
the same with a man of quality as with another.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> How! no sure, the man of quality is likest
one's husband, and therefore the fault should be the less.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> But then the pleasure should be the less.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Fy, fy, fy, for shame, sister! whither shall
we ramble? Be continent in your discourse, or I shall
hate you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Besides, an intrigue is so much the more
notorious for the man's quality.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> 'Tis true that nobody takes notice of a
private man, and therefore with him 'tis more secret; and
the crime's the less when 'tis not known.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> You say true; i'faith, I think you are in the
right on't: 'tis not an injury to a husband, till it be an
injury to our honours; so that a woman of honour loses
no honour with a private person; and to say truth—</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> So, the little fellow is grown a private person—with
her—[<i>Apart to</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But still my dear, dear honour—</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget, Horner</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, my dear, dear of honour, thou hast still
so much honour in thy mouth—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> That she has none elsewhere. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_278" id="Page_278">[Pg 278]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Oh, what d'ye mean to bring in these upon
us?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Foh! these are as bad as wits.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Foh!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Let us leave the room.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Stay, stay; faith, to tell you the naked
truth—</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Fy, Sir Jasper! do not use that word
naked.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Well, well, in short I have business at Whitehall,
and cannot go to the play with you, therefore would
have you go—</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> With those two to a play?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> No, not with t'other, but with Mr. Horner;
there can be no more scandal to go with him than with
Mr. Tattle, or Master Limberham.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> With that nasty fellow! no—no.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nay, prithee, dear, hear me.
[<i>Whispers to</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ladies—[<span class="smcap">Horner</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span> <i>draw near</i> Mrs.
<span class="smcap">Squeamish</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Stand off.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Do not approach us.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> You herd with the wits, you are obscenity all
over.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And I would as soon look upon a
picture of Adam and Eve, without fig-leaves, as any of
you, if I could help it; therefore keep off, and do not
make us sick.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> What a devil are these?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, these are pretenders to honour, as critics
to wit, only by censuring others; and as every raw,
peevish, out-of-humoured, affected, dull, tea-drinking,
arithmetical fop, sets up for a wit by railing at men of
sense, so these for honour, by railing at the court, and
ladies of as great honour as quality.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_279" id="Page_279">[Pg 279]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Come, Mr. Horner, I must desire you to go
with these ladies to the play, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I, sir?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, ay, come, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I must beg your pardon, sir, and theirs; I will
not be seen in women's company in public again for the
world.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ha, ha, strange aversion!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> No, he's for women's company in
private.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He—poor man—he—ha! ha! ha!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> 'Tis a greater shame amongst lewd fellows
to be seen in virtuous women's company, than for the
women to be seen with them.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Indeed, madam, the time was I only hated
virtuous women, but now I hate the other too; I beg
your pardon, ladies.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> You are very obliging, sir, because we would
not be troubled with you.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> In sober sadness, he shall go.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Nay, if he wo' not, I am ready to wait upon the
ladies, and I think I am the fitter man.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> You sir! no, I thank you for that. Master
Horner is a privileged man amongst the virtuous ladies,
'twill be a great while before you are so; he! he! he! he's
my wife's gallant; he! he! he! No, pray withdraw, sir, for
as I take it, the virtuous ladies have no business with
you.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> And I am sure he can have none with them.
'Tis strange a man can't come amongst virtuous women
now, but upon the same terms as men are admitted into
the Great Turk's seraglio. But heavens keep me from
being an ombre player with 'em!—But where is Pinchwife?
[<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Come, come, man; what, avoid the sweet
society of womankind? that sweet, soft, gentle, tame,
noble creature, woman, made for man's companion—</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_280" id="Page_280">[Pg 280]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So is that soft, gentle, tame, and more noble
creature a spaniel, and has all their tricks; can fawn, lie
down, suffer beating, and fawn the more; barks at your
friends when they come to see you, makes your bed hard,
gives you fleas, and the mange sometimes. And all the
difference is, the spaniel's the more faithful animal, and
fawns but upon one master.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He! he! he!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> O the rude beast!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Insolent brute!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Brute! stinking, mortified, rotten French
wether, to dare—</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Hold, an't please your ladyship.—For shame,
Master Horner! your mother was a woman—[<i>Aside.</i>]
Now shall I never reconcile 'em.—[<i>Aside to</i> Lady
<span class="smcap">Fidget</span>.] Hark you, madam, take my advice in your anger.
You know you often want one to make up your drolling
pack of ombre players, and you may cheat him easily;
for he's an ill gamester, and consequently loves play.
Besides, you know you have but two old civil gentlemen
(with stinking breaths too) to wait upon you abroad;
take in the third into your service. The other are but
crazy; and a lady should have a supernumerary gentleman-usher
as a supernumerary coach-horse, lest sometimes
you should be forced to stay at home.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But are you sure he loves play, and has
money?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He loves play as much as you, and has
money as much as I.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Then I am contented to make him pay for
his scurrility. Money makes up in a measure all other
wants in men.—Those whom we cannot make hold for
gallants, we make fine. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, so; now to mollify, wheedle
him.—[<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.] Master Horner, will you
never keep civil company? methinks 'tis time now, since
you are only fit for them. Come, come, man, you must<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_281" id="Page_281">[Pg 281]</a></span>
e'en fall to visiting our wives, eating at our tables, drinking
tea with our virtuous relations after dinner, dealing
cards to 'em, reading plays and gazettes to 'em, picking
fleas out of their smocks for 'em, collecting receipts, new
songs, women, pages, and footmen for 'em.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I hope they'll afford me better employment, sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He! he! he! 'tis fit you know your work
before you come into your place. And since you are
unprovided of a lady to flatter, and a good house to eat
at, pray frequent mine, and call my wife mistress, and
she shall call you gallant, according to the custom.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Who, I?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Faith, thou sha't for my sake; come, for my
sake only.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> For your sake—</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Come, come, here's a gamester for you; let
him be a little familiar sometimes; nay, what if a little
rude? Gamesters may be rude with ladies, you know.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Yes; losing gamesters have a privilege with
women.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I always thought the contrary, that the winning
gamester had most privilege with women; for when you
have lost your money to a man, you'll lose anything you
have, all you have, they say, and he may use you as he
pleases.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He! he! he! well, win or lose, you shall
have your liberty with her.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> As he behaves himself; and for your sake
I'll give him admittance and freedom.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> All sorts of freedom, madam?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, ay, ay, all sorts of freedom thou canst
take. And so go to her, begin thy new employment;
wheedle her, jest with her, and be better acquainted one
with another.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] I think I know her already; therefore
may venture with her my secret for hers.
[<span class="smcap">Horner</span> <i>and</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span> <i>whisper.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_282" id="Page_282">[Pg 282]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Sister cuz, I have provided an innocent playfellow
for you there.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Who, he?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> There's a playfellow, indeed!</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Yes sure.—What, he is good enough to play
at cards, blindman's-buff, or the fool with, sometimes!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Foh! we'll have no such playfellows.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> No, sir; you shan't choose playfellows for
us, we thank you.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nay, pray hear me. [<i>Whispering to them.</i></p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But, poor gentleman, could you be so
generous, so truly a man of honour, as for the sakes of us
women of honour, to cause yourself to be reported no
man? No man! and to suffer yourself the greatest
shame that could fall upon a man, that none might fall
upon us women by your conversation? but, indeed, sir,
as perfectly, perfectly the same man as before your going
into France, sir? as perfectly, perfectly, sir?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> As perfectly, perfectly, madam. Nay, I scorn
you should take my word; I desire to be tried only,
madam.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Well, that's spoken again like a man of
honour: all men of honour desire to come to the test.
But, indeed, generally you men report such things of
yourselves, one does not know how or whom to believe;
and it is come to that pass, we dare not take your words
no more than your tailor's, without some staid servant of
yours be bound with you. But I have so strong a faith
in your honour, dear, dear, noble sir, that I'd forfeit mine
for yours, at any time, dear sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, madam, you should not need to forfeit it for
me; I have given you security already to save you harmless,
my late reputation being so well known in the world,
madam.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But if upon any future falling-out, or upon
a suspicion of my taking the trust out of your hands, to
employ some other, you yourself should betray your trust,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_283" id="Page_283">[Pg 283]</a></span>
dear sir? I mean, if you'll give me leave to speak
obscenely, you might tell, dear sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> If I did, nobody would believe me. The
reputation of impotency is as hardly recovered again in
the world as that of cowardice, dear madam.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Nay, then, as one may say, you may do
your worst, dear, dear sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Come, is your ladyship reconciled to him
yet? have you agreed on matters? for I must be gone to
Whitehall.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Why, indeed, Sir Jasper, Master Horner is
a thousand, thousand times a better man than I thought
him. Cousin Squeamish, sister Dainty, I can name him
now. Truly, not long ago, you know, I thought his very
name obscenity; and I would as soon have lain with him
as have named him.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Very likely, poor madam.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> I believe it.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> No doubt on't.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Well, well—that your ladyship is as virtuous
as any she, I know, and him all the town knows—he! he!
he! therefore now you like him, get you gone to your
business together, go, go to your business, I say, pleasure,
whilst I go to my pleasure, business.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Come, then, dear gallant.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Come away, my dearest mistress.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> So, so; why, 'tis as I'd have it. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And as I'd have it.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i></p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Who for his business from his wife will run,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Takes the best care to have her business done.</span><br />
</p>

<p>[<i>Exeunt.</i></p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_284" id="Page_284">[Pg 284]</a></span></p>




<h3>ACT THE THIRD.</h3>


<h4>SCENE I.—<i>A Room in</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife's</span> <i>House.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Sister, what ails you? you are
grown melancholy.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Would it not make any
one melancholy to see you go every
day fluttering about abroad, whilst I
must stay at home like a poor lonely
sullen bird in a cage?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Ay, sister; but you came young, and just from
the nest to your cage: so that I thought you liked it, and
could be as cheerful in't as others that took their flight
themselves early, and are hopping abroad in the open
air.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, I confess I was quiet enough till my
husband told me what pure lives the London ladies live
abroad, with their dancing, meetings, and junketings, and
dressed every day in their best gowns; and I warrant
you, play at nine-pins every day of the week, so they do.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, what's here to do? you are putting the
town-pleasures in her head, and setting her a-longing.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Yes, after nine-pins. You suffer none to give
her those longings you mean but yourself.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I tell her of the vanities of the town like a
confessor.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_285" id="Page_285">[Pg 285]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> A confessor! just such a confessor as he that,
by forbidding a silly ostler to grease the horse's teeth,
taught him to do't.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, Mrs. Flippant, good precepts are lost
when bad examples are still before us: the liberty you
take abroad makes her hanker after it, and out of humour
at home. Poor wretch! she desired not to come to
London; I would bring her.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Very well.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> She has been this week in town, and never desired
till this afternoon to go abroad.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Was she not at a play yesterday?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Yes; but she ne'er asked me; I was myself the
cause of her going.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Then if she ask you again, you are the cause of
her asking, and not my example.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, to-morrow night I shall be rid of you;
and the next day, before 'tis light, she and I'll be rid of
the town, and my dreadful apprehensions.—Come, be not
melancholy; for thou sha't go into the country after
to-morrow, dearest.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Great comfort!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pish! what d'ye tell me of the country for?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How's this! what, pish at the country?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Let me alone; I am not well.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> O, if that be all—what ails my dearest?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Truly, I don't know: but I have not been
well since you told me there was a gallant at the play in
love with me.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Ha!—</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> That's by my example too!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Nay, if you are not well, but are so concerned,
because a lewd fellow chanced to lie, and say he liked
you, you'll make me sick too.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Of what sickness?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> O, of that which is worse than the plague,
jealousy.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_286" id="Page_286">[Pg 286]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pish, you jeer! I'm sure there's no such
disease in our receipt-book at home.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, thou never met'st with it, poor innocent.—Well,
if thou cuckold me, 'twill be my own fault—for
cuckolds and bastards are generally makers of their own
fortune. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Well, but pray, bud, let's go to a play to-night.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Tis just done, she comes from it. But why are
you so eager to see a play?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Faith, dear, not that I care one pin for
their talk there; but I like to look upon the player-men,
and would see, if I could, the gallant you say loves me:
that's all, dear bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Is that all, dear bud?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> This proceeds from my example!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> But if the play be done, let's go abroad,
however, dear bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come have a little patience and thou shalt go
into the country on Friday.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Therefore I would see first some sights to
tell my neighbours of. Nay, I will go abroad, that's once.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I'm the cause of this desire too!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But now I think on't, who, who was the cause
of Horner's coming to my lodgings to-day? That was
you.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> No, you, because you would not let him see
your handsome wife out of your lodging.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Why, O Lord! did the gentleman come
hither to see me indeed?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, no.—You are not the cause of that damned
question too, Mistress Alithea?—[<i>Aside.</i>] Well, she's in
the right of it. He is in love with my wife—and comes
after her—'tis so—but I'll nip his love in the bud; lest
he should follow us into the country, and break his
chariot-wheel near our house, on purpose for an excuse
to come to't. But I think I know the town.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_287" id="Page_287">[Pg 287]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Come, pray, bud, let's go abroad before
'tis late; for I will go, that's flat and plain.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So! the obstinacy already of the town-wife;
and I must, whilst she's here, humour her like one.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Sister, how shall we do, that she may not be
seen, or known?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Let her put on her mask.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Pshaw! a mask makes people but the more
inquisitive, and is as ridiculous a disguise as a stage-beard:
her shape, stature, habit will be known. And if
we should meet with Horner, he would be sure to take
acquaintance with us, must wish her joy, kiss her, talk to
her, leer upon her, and the devil and all. No, I'll not
use her to a mask, 'tis dangerous; for masks have made
more cuckolds than the best faces that ever were known.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> How will you do then?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, shall we go? The Exchange will
be shut, and I have a mind to see that.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So—I have it—I'll dress her up in the suit we
are to carry down to her brother, little Sir James; nay, I
understand the town-tricks. Come, let's go dress her.
A mask! no—a woman masked, like a covered dish,
gives a man curiosity and appetite; when, it may be,
uncovered, 'twould turn his stomach: no, no.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Indeed your comparison is something a greasy
one: but I had a gentle gallant used to say, A beauty
masked, like the sun in eclipse, gathers together more
gazers than if it shined out. [<i>Exeunt.</i></p>


<h4>SCENE II.—<i>The New Exchange.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Horner, Harcourt</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Engaged to women, and not sup with us!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, a pox on 'em all!</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> You were much a more reasonable man in the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_288" id="Page_288">[Pg 288]</a></span>
morning, and had as noble resolutions against 'em, as a
widower of a week's liberty.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Did I ever think to see you keep company with
women in vain?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> In vain: no—'tis since I can't love 'em, to be
revenged on 'em.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Now your sting is gone, you looked in the box
amongst all those women like a drone in the hive; all
upon you, shoved and ill-used by 'em all, and thrust from
one side to t'other.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Yet he must be buzzing amongst 'em still, like
other beetle-headed liquorish drones. Avoid 'em, and
hate 'em, as they hate you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Because I do hate 'em, and would hate 'em yet
more, I'll frequent 'em. You may see by marriage,
nothing makes a man hate a woman more than her
constant conversation. In short, I converse with 'em,
as you do with rich fools, to laugh at 'em and use 'em
ill.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> But I would no more sup with women, unless I
could lie with 'em, than sup with a rich coxcomb, unless
I could cheat him.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes, I have known thee sup with a fool for his
drinking; if he could set out your hand that way only,
you were satisfied, and if he were a wine-swallowing
mouth, 'twas enough.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Yes, a man drinks often with a fool, as he tosses
with a marker, only to keep his hand in use. But do the
ladies drink?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes, sir; and I shall have the pleasure at least
of laying 'em flat with a bottle, and bring as much scandal
that way upon 'em as formerly t'other.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Perhaps you may prove as weak a brother among
'em that way as t'other.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Foh! drinking with women is as unnatural as
scolding with 'em. But 'tis a pleasure of decayed fornicators,
and the basest way of quenching love.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_289" id="Page_289">[Pg 289]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Nay, 'tis drowning love, instead of quenching it.
But leave us for civil women too!</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Ay, when he can't be the better for 'em. We
hardly pardon a man that leaves his friend for a wench,
and that's a pretty lawful call.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Faith, I would not leave you for 'em, if they
would not drink.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Who would disappoint his company at Lewis's
for a gossiping?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Foh! Wine and women, good apart, together are
as nauseous as sack and sugar. But hark you, sir, before
you go, a little of your advice; an old maimed general,
when unfit for action, is fittest for counsel. I have other
designs upon women than eating and drinking with them;
I am in love with Sparkish's mistress, whom he is to marry
to-morrow: now how shall I get her?</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>, <i>looking about.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, here comes one will help you to her.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> He! he, I tell you, is my rival, and will hinder
my love.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No; a foolish rival and a jealous husband
assist their rival's designs; for they are sure to make
their women hate them, which is the first step to their
love for another man.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> But I cannot come near his mistress but in his
company.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Still the better for you; for fools are most easily
cheated when they themselves are accessories: and he is
to be bubbled of his mistress as of his money, the
common mistress, by keeping him company.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Who is that that is to be bubbled? Faith, let
me snack; I han't met with a bubble since Christmas.
'Gad, I think bubbles are like their brother woodcocks,
go out with the cold weather.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> A pox! he did not hear all, I hope.
[<i>Apart to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_290" id="Page_290">[Pg 290]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, you bubbling rogues you, where do we
sup?—Oh, Harcourt, my mistress tells me you have
been making fierce love to her all the play long: ha!
ha!—But I—</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I make love to her!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, I forgive thee, for I think I know thee,
and I know her; but I am sure I know myself.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Did she tell you so? I see all women are like
these of the Exchange; who, to enhance the prize of
their commodities, report to their fond customers offers
which were never made 'em.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, women are apt to tell before the intrigue,
as men after it, and so show themselves the vainer sex.
But hast thou a mistress, Sparkish? 'Tis as hard for me
to believe it, as that thou ever hadst a bubble, as you
bragged just now.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> O, your servant, sir: are you at your raillery,
sir? But we are some of us beforehand with you to-day
at the play. The wits were something bold with you,
sir; did you not hear us laugh?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes; but I thought you had gone to plays, to
laugh at the poet's wit, not at your own.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Your servant, sir: no, I thank you. 'Gad I go
to a play as to a country treat; I carry my own wine to
one, and my own wit to t'other, or else I'm sure I should
not be merry at either. And the reason why we are so
often louder than the players, is, because we think we
speak more wit, and so become the poet's rivals in his
audience: for to tell you the truth, we hate the silly
rogues; nay, so much, that we find fault even with their
bawdy upon the stage, whilst we talk nothing else in the
pit as loud.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But why shouldst thou hate the silly poets?
Thou hast too much wit to be one; and they, like
whores, are only hated by each other: and thou dost
scorn writing, I'm sure.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Yes; I'd have you to know I scorn writing:<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_291" id="Page_291">[Pg 291]</a></span>
but women, women, that make men do all foolish things,
make 'em write songs too. Everybody does it. 'Tis
even as common with lovers, as playing with fans; and
you can no more help rhyming to your Phillis, than
drinking to your Phillis.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Nay, poetry in love is no more to be avoided
than jealousy.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> But the poets damned your songs, did they?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Damn the poets! they have turned 'em into
burlesque, as they call it. That burlesque is a hocus-pocus
trick they have got, which, by the virtue of <i>Hictius
doctius topsy turvy</i>, they make a wise and witty man in
the world, a fool upon the stage you know not how: and
'tis therefore I hate 'em too, for I know not but it may
be my own case; for they'll put a man into a play for
looking asquint. Their predecessors were contented to
make serving-men only their stage-fools: but these rogues
must have gentlemen, with a pox to 'em, nay, knights;
and, indeed, you shall hardly see a fool upon the stage
but he's a knight. And to tell you the truth, they have
kept me these six years from being a knight in earnest,
for fear of being knighted in a play, and dubbed a fool.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Blame 'em not, they must follow their copy, the
age.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> But why shouldst thou be afraid of being in a
play, who expose yourself every day in the play-houses,
and at public places?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> 'Tis but being on the stage, instead of standing
on a bench in the pit.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Don't you give money to painters to draw you
like? and are you afraid of your pictures at length in a
playhouse, where all your mistresses may see you?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> A pox! painters don't draw the small-pox or
pimples in one's face. Come, damn all your silly authors
whatever, all books and booksellers, by the world; and
all readers, courteous or uncourteous!</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> But who comes here, Sparkish?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_292" id="Page_292">[Pg 292]</a></span></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>in man's clothes</i>,
<span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Oh, hide me! There's my mistress too.
[<span class="smcap">Sparkish</span> <i>hides himself behind</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> She sees you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> But I will not see her. 'Tis time to go to
Whitehall, and I must not fail the drawing-room.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Pray, first carry me, and reconcile me to her.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Another time. Faith, the king will have
supped.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Not with the worse stomach for thy absence.
Thou art one of those fools that think their attendance
at the king's meals as necessary as his physicians, when
you are more troublesome to him than his doctors or his
dogs.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! I know my interest, sir. Prithee hide
me.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Your servant, Pinchwife.—What, he knows us
not!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come along. [<i>To his</i> Wife <i>aside</i>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray, have you any ballads? give me sixpenny
worth.</p>

<p><i>Bookseller.</i> We have no ballads.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Then give me "Covent Garden Drollery,"
and a play or two—Oh, here's "Tarugo's Wiles," and
"The Slighted Maiden";<a name="FNanchor_75_75" id="FNanchor_75_75"></a><a href="#Footnote_75_75" class="fnanchor">[75]</a> I'll have them.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No; plays are not for your reading. Come
along; will you discover yourself? [<i>Apart to her.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Who is that pretty youth with him, Sparkish?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_293" id="Page_293">[Pg 293]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> I believe his wife's brother, because he's something
like her: but I never saw her but once.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Extremely handsome; I have seen a face like
it too. Let us follow 'em.
[<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>, Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife, Alithea</span>,
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy; Horner</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span> <i>following
them.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Come, Sparkish, your mistress saw you, and will
be angry you go not to her. Besides, I would fain be
reconciled to her, which none but you can do, dear
friend.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Well, that's a better reason, dear friend. I
would not go near her now for her's or my own sake;
but I can deny you nothing: for though I have known
thee a great while, never go, if I do not love thee as well
as a new acquaintance.</p>

<p><i>Mar.</i> I am obliged to you indeed, dear friend. I
would be well with her, only to be well with thee still;
for these ties to wives usually dissolve all ties to friends.
I would be contented she should enjoy you a-nights, but
I would have you to myself a-days as I have had, dear
friend.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> And thou shalt enjoy me a-days, dear, dear
friend, never stir: and I'll be divorced from her, sooner
than from thee. Come along.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, we are hard put to't, when we make
our rival our procurer; but neither she nor her brother
would let me come near her now. When all's done, a
rival is the best cloak to steal to a mistress under, without
suspicion; and when we have once got to her as we
desire, we throw him off like other cloaks.
[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish, Harcourt</span> <i>following him.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.] Sister, if you will not go, we
must leave you.—[<i>Aside.</i>] The fool her gallant and she
will muster up all the young saunterers of this place, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_294" id="Page_294">[Pg 294]</a></span>
they will leave their dear sempstresses to follow us. What
a swarm of cuckolds and cuckold-makers are here!—Come,
let's be gone, Mistress Margery.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Don't you believe that; I han't half my
bellyfull of sights yet.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Then walk this way.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Lord, what a power of brave signs are
here! stay—the Bull's-Head, the Ram's-Head, and the
Stag's-Head, dear—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Nay, if every husband's proper sign here were
visible, they would be all alike.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What d'ye mean by that, bud?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Tis no matter—no matter, bud.</p>

<p><i>Mrs Pinch.</i> Pray tell me: nay, I will know.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> They would be all Bulls, Stags, and Rams-heads.
[<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish, Harcourt, Alithea</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>,
<i>at the other side.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, dear madam, for my sake you shall be
reconciled to him.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> For your sake I hate him.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> That's something too cruel, madam, to hate me
for his sake.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay indeed, madam, too, too cruel to me, to
hate my friend for my sake.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I hate him because he is your enemy; and you
ought to hate him too, for making love to me, if you love
me.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> That's a good one! I hate a man for loving
you! If he did love you, 'tis but what he can't help;
and 'tis your fault, not his, if he admires you. I hate a
man for being of my opinion! I'll n'er do't, by the world.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Is it for your honour, or mine, to suffer a man
to make love to me, who am to marry you to-morrow?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Is it for your honour, or mine, to have me
jealous? That he makes love to you, is a sign you are<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_295" id="Page_295">[Pg 295]</a></span>
handsome; and that I am not jealous, is a sign you are
virtuous. That I think is for your honour.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> But 'tis your honour too I am concerned for.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> But why, dearest madam, will you be more
concerned for his honour than he is himself? Let his
honour alone, for my sake and his. He! he has no
honour—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How's that?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> But what my dear friend can guard himself.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> O ho—that's right again.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Your care of his honour argues his neglect of it,
which is no honour to my dear friend here. Therefore
once more, let his honour go which way it will, dear
madam.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay, ay; were it for my honour to marry a
woman whose virtue I suspected, and could not trust her
in a friend's hands?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Are you not afraid to lose me?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> He afraid to lose you, madam! No, no—you may
see how the most estimable and most glorious creature
in the world is valued by him. Will you not see it?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Right, honest Frank, I have that noble value
for her that I cannot be jealous of her.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> You mistake him. He means, you care not for
me, nor who has me.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Lord, madam, I see you are jealous! Will you
wrest a poor man's meaning from his words?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> You astonish me, sir, with your want of jealousy.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> And you make me giddy, madam, with your
jealousy and fears, and virtue and honour. 'Gad, I see
virtue makes a woman as troublesome as a little reading
or learning.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Monstrous!</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Well, to see what easy husbands these women of
quality can meet with! a poor chambermaid can never
have such ladylike luck. Besides, he's thrown away upon
her. She'll make no use of her fortune, her blessing,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_296" id="Page_296">[Pg 296]</a></span>
none to a gentleman, for a pure cuckold; for it requires
good breeding to be a cuckold. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I tell you then plainly, he pursues me to marry
me.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw!</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Come, madam, you see you strive in vain to make
him jealous of me. My dear friend is the kindest creature
in the world to me.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Poor fellow!</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> But his kindness only is not enough for me,
without your favour, your good opinion, dear madam:
'tis that must perfect my happiness. Good gentleman,
he believes all I say: would you would do so! Jealous
of me! I would not wrong him nor you for the world.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Look you there. Hear him, hear him, and do
not walk away so. [<span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>walks carelessly to and fro.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I love you, madam, so—</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How's that? Nay, now you begin to go too far
indeed.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> So much, I confess, I say, I love you, that I would
not have you miserable, and cast yourself away upon so
unworthy and inconsiderable a thing as what you see here.
[<i>Clapping his hand on his breast, points at</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, faith, I believe thou wouldst not: now his
meaning is plain; but I knew before thou wouldst not
wrong me, nor her.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, no, Heavens forbid the glory of her sex
should fall so low, as into the embraces of such a contemptible
wretch, the least of mankind—my friend here—I
injure him! [<i>Embracing</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Very well.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, no, dear friend, I knew it.—Madam, you
see he will rather wrong himself than me, in giving himself
such names.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Do not you understand him yet?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Yes: how modestly he speaks of himself, poor
fellow!</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_297" id="Page_297">[Pg 297]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Methinks he speaks impudently of yourself,
since—before yourself too; insomuch that I can no longer
suffer his scurrilous abusiveness to you, no more than his
love to me. [<i>Offers to go.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, nay, madam, pray stay—his love to you!
Lord, madam, has he not spoke yet plain enough?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Yes, indeed, I should think so.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Well then, by the world, a man can't speak
civilly to a woman now, but presently she says, he makes
love to her. Nay, madam, you shall stay, with your
pardon, since you have not yet understood him, till he
has made an eclaircissement of his love to you, that is,
what kind of love it is. Answer to thy catechism, friend;
do you love my mistress here?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Yes, I wish she would not doubt it.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> But how do you love her?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> With all my soul.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I thank him, methinks he speaks plain enough
now.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.] You are out still.—But with what
kind of love, Harcourt?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> With the best and the truest love in the world.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Look you there then, that is with no matrimonial
love, I'm sure.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> How's that? do you say matrimonial love is not
best?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> 'Gad, I went too far ere I was aware. But speak
for thyself, Harcourt, you said you would not wrong me
nor her.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, so, madam, e'en take him for Heaven's sake.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Look you there, madam.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Who should in all justice be yours, he that loves
you most. [<i>Claps his hand on his breast.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Look you there, Mr. Sparkish, who's that?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Who should it be?—Go on, Harcourt.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Who loves you more than women titles, or
fortune fools. [<i>Points at</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_298" id="Page_298">[Pg 298]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Look you there, he means me still, for he
points at me.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Ridiculous!</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Who can only match your faith and constancy in
love.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Who knows, if it be possible, how to value so
much beauty and virtue.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Whose love can no more be equalled in the world,
than that heavenly form of yours.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Who could no more suffer a rival, than your
absence, and yet could no more suspect your virtue, than
his own constancy in his love to you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Who, in fine, loves you better than his eyes, that
first made him love you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay—Nay, madam, faith, you shan't go till—</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Have a care, lest you make me stay too long.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> But till he has saluted you; that I may be
assured you are friends, after his honest advice and
declaration. Come, pray, madam, be friends with him.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> You must pardon me, sir, that I am not yet so
obedient to you.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, invite your wife to kiss men? Monstrous!
are you not ashamed? I will never forgive you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Are you not ashamed, that I should have more
confidence in the chastity of your family than you have?
You must not teach me, I am a man of honour, sir, though
I am frank and free; I am frank, sir—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Very frank, sir, to share your wife with your
friends.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> He is an humble, menial friend, such as reconciles
the differences of the marriage bed; you know man<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_299" id="Page_299">[Pg 299]</a></span>
and wife do not always agree; I design him for that use,
therefore would have him well with my wife.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> A menial friend!—you will get a great many
menial friends, by showing your wife as you do.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> What then? It may be I have a pleasure in't,
as I have to show fine clothes at a play-house, the first day,
and count money before poor rogues.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> He that shows his wife or money, will be in
danger of having them borrowed sometimes.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> I love to be envied, and would not marry a wife
that I alone could love; loving alone is as dull as eating
alone. Is it not a frank age? and I am a frank person;
and to tell you the truth, it may be, I love to have rivals
in a wife, they make her seem to a man still but as a kept
mistress; and so good night, for I must to Whitehall.—Madam,
I hope you are now reconciled to my friend; and
so I wish you a good night, madam, and sleep if you
can: for to-morrow you know I must visit you early with
a canonical gentleman. Good night, dear Harcourt.
[<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Madam, I hope you will not refuse my visit to-morrow,
if it should be earlier with a canonical gentleman
than Mr. Sparkish's.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> This gentlewoman is yet under my care, therefore
you must yet forbear your freedom with her, sir.
[<i>Coming between</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Must, sir?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Yes, sir, she is my sister.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> 'Tis well she is, sir—for I must be her servant,
sir.—Madam—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come away, sister, we had been gone, if it had
not been for you, and so avoided these lewd rake-hells,
who seem to haunt us.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> How now, Pinchwife!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Your servant.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_300" id="Page_300">[Pg 300]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What! I see a little time in the country makes
a man turn wild and unsociable, and only fit to converse
with his horses, dogs, and his herds.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I have business, sir, and must mind it; your
business is pleasure, therefore you and I must go different
ways.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, you may go on, but this pretty young
gentleman—[<i>Takes hold of Mrs.</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> The lady—</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> And the maid—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Shall stay with us; for I suppose their business
is the same with ours, pleasure.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Sdeath, he knows her, she carries it so sillily!
yet if he does not, I should be more silly to discover it
first. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Pray, let us go, sir.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, come—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>To</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.] Had you not rather stay
with us?—Prithee, Pinchwife, who is this pretty young
gentleman?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> One to whom I'm a guardian.—[<i>Aside.</i>] I wish
I could keep her out of your hands.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Who is he? I never saw anything so pretty in
all my life.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Pshaw! do not look upon him so much, he's a
poor bashful youth, you'll put him out of countenance.—Come
away, brother. [<i>Offers to take her away.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> O, your brother!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Yes, my wife's brother.—Come, come, she'll
stay supper for us.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I thought so, for he is very like her I saw you
at the play with, whom I told you I was in love with.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O jeminy! is that he that was in
love with me? I am glad on't, I vow, for he's a curious
fine gentleman, and I love him already, too.—[<i>To</i>
<span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.] Is this he, bud?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come away, come away. [<i>To his</i> Wife.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_301" id="Page_301">[Pg 301]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, what haste are you in? why won't you let
me talk with him?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Because you'll debauch him; he's yet young
and innocent, and I would not have him debauched for
anything in the world.—[<i>Aside.</i>] How she gazes on him!
the devil!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Harcourt, Dorilant, look you here, this is the
likeness of that dowdy he told us of, his wife; did you
ever see a lovelier creature? The rogue has reason to be
jealous of his wife, since she is like him, for she would
make all that see her in love with her.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> And, as I remember now, she is as like him here
as can be.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> She is indeed very pretty, if she be like him.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Very pretty? a very pretty commendation!—she
is a glorious creature, beautiful beyond all things I
ever beheld.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So, so.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> More beautiful than a poet's first mistress of
imagination.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Or another man's last mistress of flesh and
blood.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, now you jeer, sir; pray don't jeer
me.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, come.—[<i>Aside.</i>] By Heavens, she'll
discover herself!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I speak of your sister, sir.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Ay, but saying she was handsome, if like him,
made him blush.—[<i>Aside.</i>] I am upon a rack!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Methinks he is so handsome he should not be
a man.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O, there 'tis out! he has discovered
her! I am not able to suffer any longer.—[<i>To his</i> Wife.]
Come, come away, I say.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, by your leave, sir, he shall not go yet.—[<i>Aside
to them.</i>] Harcourt, Dorilant, let us torment this
jealous rogue a little.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_302" id="Page_302">[Pg 302]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Har. Dor.</i> How?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I'll show you.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, pray let him go, I cannot stay fooling
any longer; I tell you his sister stays supper for us.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Does she? Come then, we'll all go to sup with
he and thee.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, now I think on't, having stayed so long for
us, I warrant she's gone to bed.—[<i>Aside.</i>] I wish she and
I were well out of their hands.—[<i>To his</i> Wife.] Come,
I must rise early to-morrow, come.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well then, if she be gone to bed, I wish her and
you a good night. But pray, young gentleman, present
my humble service to her.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Thank you heartily, sir.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] 'Sdeath, she will discover herself yet in
spite of me—[<i>Aloud.</i>] He is something more civil to
you, for your kindness to his sister, than I am, it seems.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Tell her, dear sweet little gentleman, for all your
brother there, that you have revived the love I had for
her at first sight in the playhouse.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> But did you love her indeed, and indeed?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, so.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Away, I say.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, stay.—Yes, indeed, and indeed, pray
do you tell her so, and give her this kiss from me.
[<i>Kisses her.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O Heavens! what do I suffer? Now
'tis too plain he knows her, and yet—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And this, and this—[<i>Kisses her again.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What do you kiss me for? I am no
woman.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, there, 'tis out.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Come, I
cannot, nor will stay any longer.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, they shall send your lady a kiss too. Here,
Harcourt, Dorilant, will you not? [<i>They kiss her.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] How! do I suffer this? Was I not
accusing another just now for this rascally patience, in
permitting his wife to be kissed before his face? Ten<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_303" id="Page_303">[Pg 303]</a></span>
thousand ulcers gnaw away their lips.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Come,
come.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Good night, dear little gentleman; madam,
good night: farewell, Pinchwife.—[<i>Apart to</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.] Did not I tell you I would raise his
jealous gall?
[<i>Exeunt</i> <span class="smcap">Horner, Harcourt</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So, they are gone at last; stay, let me see first
if the coach be at this door. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Horner, Harcourt</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What, not gone yet? Will you be sure to do as
I desired you, sweet sir?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Sweet sir, but what will you give me then?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Anything. Come away into the next walk.
[<i>Exit, haling away</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Hold! hold! what d'ye do?</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Stay, stay, hold—</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Hold, madam, hold, let him present him—he'll
come presently; nay, I will never let you go till you
answer my question.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> For God's sake, sir, I must follow 'em.
[<span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>, <i>struggling with</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span>.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> No, I have something to present you with too,
you shan't follow them.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Where?—how—what's become of?—gone!—whither?</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> He's only gone with the gentleman, who will
give him something, an't please your worship.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Something!—give him something, with a pox!—where
are they?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> In the next walk only, brother.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Only, only! where, where?
[<i>Exit and returns presently, then goes out again.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_304" id="Page_304">[Pg 304]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> What's the matter with him? why so much concerned?
But, dearest madam—</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Pray let me go, sir; I have said and suffered
enough already.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Then you will not look upon, nor pity, my
sufferings?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> To look upon 'em, when I cannot help 'em,
were cruelty, not pity; therefore, I will never see you
more.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Let me then, madam, have my privilege of a
banished lover, complaining or railing, and giving you
but a farewell reason why, if you cannot condescend to
marry me, you should not take that wretch, my rival.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> He only, not you, since my honour is engaged
so far to him, can give me a reason why I should not
marry him; but if he be true, and what I think him to
me, I must be so to him. Your servant, sir.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Have women only constancy when 'tis a vice,
and are, like Fortune, only true to fools?</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Thou sha't not stir, thou robust creature; you
see I can deal with you, therefore you should stay the
rather, and be kind.
[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>, <i>who struggles to get from him.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Gone, gone, not to be found! quite gone! ten
thousand plagues go with 'em! Which way went they?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> But into t'other walk, brother.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Their business will be done presently sure, an't
please your worship; it can't be long in doing, I'm sure
on't.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Are they not there?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, you know where they are, you infamous
wretch, eternal shame of your family, which you do not
dishonour enough yourself you think, but you must help
her to do it too, thou legion of bawds!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Good brother—</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_305" id="Page_305">[Pg 305]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Damned, damned sister!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Look you here, she's coming.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>running, with her hat full of
oranges and dried fruit under her arm,</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>
<i>following.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O dear bud, look you here what I have
got, see!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> And what I have got here too, which you can't
see! [<i>Aside, rubbing his forehead.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> The fine gentleman has given me better
things yet.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Has he so?—[<i>Aside.</i>] Out of breath and
coloured!—I must hold yet.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I have only given your little brother an orange,
sir.</p>

<p><i>Pinch. [To</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.] Thank you, sir.—[<i>Aside.</i>] You
have only squeezed my orange, I suppose, and given it
me again; yet I must have a city patience.—[<i>To his</i>
Wife.] Come, come away.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Stay, till I have put up my fine things, bud.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> O, Master Horner, come, come, the ladies
stay for you; your mistress, my wife, wonders you make
not more haste to her.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I have stayed this half hour for you here, and
'tis your fault I am not now with your wife.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> But, pray, don't let her know so much; the
truth on't is, I was advancing a certain project to his
majesty about—I'll tell you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, let's go, and hear it at your house. Good
night, sweet little gentleman; one kiss more, you'll remember
me now, I hope. [<i>Kisses her.</i></p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> What, Sir Jasper, will you separate friends? He
promised to sup with us, and if you take him to your
house, you'll be in danger of our company too.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_306" id="Page_306">[Pg 306]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Alas! gentlemen, my house is not fit for
you; there are none but civil women there, which are not
for your turn. He, you know, can bear with the society
of civil women now, ha! ha! ha! besides, he's one of my
family—he's—he! he! he!</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> What is he?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Faith, my eunuch, since you'll have it; he!
he! he! [<i>Exeunt</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> I rather wish thou wert his or my cuckold.
Harcourt, what a good cuckold is lost there for want of a
man to make him one? Thee and I cannot have Horner's
privilege, who can make use of it.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Ay, to poor Horner 'tis like coming to an estate
at threescore, when a man can't be the better for't.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Presently, bud.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Come, let us go too.—[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.] Madam,
your servant.—[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>.] Good night, strapper.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Madam, though you will not let me have a good
day or night, I wish you one; but dare not name the
other half of my wish.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Good night, sir, for ever.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> I don't know where to put this here, dear
bud, you shall eat it; nay, you shall have part of the fine
gentleman's good things, or treat, as you call it, when we
come home.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Indeed, I deserve it, since I furnished the best
part of it. [<i>Strikes away the orange.</i></p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The gallant treats presents, and gives the ball;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But 'tis the absent cuckold pays for all.</span><br />
</p>

<p>[<i>Exeunt.</i></p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_307" id="Page_307">[Pg 307]</a></span></p>




<h3>ACT THE FOURTH.</h3>


<h4>SCENE I.—<span class="smcap">Pinchwife's</span> <i>House in the morning.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>dressed in new clothes, and</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Well—madam, now have I
dressed you, and set you out with so
many ornaments, and spent upon you
ounces of essence and pulvillio;<a name="FNanchor_76_76" id="FNanchor_76_76"></a><a href="#Footnote_76_76" class="fnanchor">[76]</a> and
all this for no other purpose but as
people adorn and perfume a corpse
for a stinking second-hand grave: such, or as bad, I
think Master Sparkish's bed.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Hold your peace.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Nay, madam, I will ask you the reason why you
would banish poor Master Harcourt for ever from your
sight; how could you be so hard-hearted?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> 'Twas because I was not hard-hearted.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> No, no; 'twas stark love and kindness, I
warrant.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> It was so; I would see him no more because I
love him.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Hey day, a very pretty reason!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> You do not understand me.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> I wish you may yourself.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I was engaged to marry, you see, another man,
whom my justice will not suffer me to deceive or injure.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_308" id="Page_308">[Pg 308]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Can there be a greater cheat or wrong done to
a man than to give him your person without your heart?
I should make a conscience of it.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I'll retrieve it for him after I am married a
while.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> The woman that marries to love better, will be
as much mistaken as the wencher that marries to live
better. No, madam, marrying to increase love is like
gaming to become rich; alas! you only lose what little
stock you had before.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I find by your rhetoric you have been bribed to
betray me.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Only by his merit, that has bribed your heart,
you see, against your word and rigid honour. But what
a devil is this honour! 'tis sure a disease in the head,
like the megrim or falling-sickness, that always hurries
people away to do themselves mischief. Men lose their
lives by it; women, what's dearer to 'em, their love, the
life of life.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Come, pray talk you no more of honour, nor
Master Harcourt; I wish the other would come to secure
my fidelity to him and his right in me.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> You will marry him then?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Certainly, I have given him already my word,
and will my hand too, to make it good, when he comes.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Well, I wish I may never stick pin more, if he
be not an arrant natural, to t'other fine gentleman.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I own he wants the wit of Harcourt, which I
will dispense withal for another want he has, which is
want of jealousy, which men of wit seldom want.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Lord, madam, what should you do with a fool
to your husband? You intend to be honest, don't you?
then that husbandly virtue, credulity, is thrown away
upon you.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> He only that could suspect my virtue should
have cause to do it; 'tis Sparkish's confidence in my truth
that obliges me to be so faithful to him.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_309" id="Page_309">[Pg 309]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> You are not sure his opinion may last.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I am satisfied, 'tis impossible for him to be
jealous after the proofs I have had of him. Jealousy in
a husband—Heaven defend me from it! it begets a
thousand plagues to a poor woman, the loss of her
honour, her quiet, and her—</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> And her pleasure.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> What d'ye mean, impertinent?</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Liberty is a great pleasure, madam.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I say, loss of her honour, her quiet, nay, her
life sometimes; and what's as bad almost, the loss of this
town; that is, she is sent into the country, which is the
last ill-usage of a husband to a wife, I think.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O, does the wind lie there?—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Then of necessity, madam, you think a man must carry
his wife into the country, if he be wise. The country is
as terrible, I find, to our young English ladies, as a
monastery to those abroad; and on my virginity, I think
they would rather marry a London jailer, than a high
sheriff of a county, since neither can stir from his employment.
Formerly women of wit married fools for a great
estate, a fine seat, or the like; but now 'tis for a pretty
seat only in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, St. James's-Fields, or
the Pall-Mall.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>, <i>dressed like a</i> Parson.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Madam, your humble servant, a happy day to
you, and to us all.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Amen.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Who have we here?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> My chaplain, faith—O madam, poor Harcourt
remembers his humble service to you; and, in obedience
to your last commands, refrains coming into your sight.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Is not that he?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, fy, no; but to show that he ne'er intended
to hinder our match, has sent his brother here to join our
hands. When I get me a wife, I must get her a chaplain,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_310" id="Page_310">[Pg 310]</a></span>
according to the custom; that is his brother, and my
chaplain.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> His brother!</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> And your chaplain, to preach in your pulpit
then—[<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> His brother!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, I knew you would not believe it.—I told
you, sir, she would take you for your brother Frank.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Believe it!</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> His brother! ha! ha! he! he has a trick left
still, it seems. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, my dearest, pray let us go to church
before the canonical hour is past.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> For shame, you are abused still.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> By the world, 'tis strange now you are so incredulous.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> 'Tis strange you are so credulous.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Dearest of my life, hear me. I tell you this is
Ned Harcourt of Cambridge, by the world; you see he
has a sneaking college look. 'Tis true he's something
like his brother Frank; and they differ from each other
no more than in their age, for they were twins.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Ha! ha! ha!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Your servant, sir; I cannot be so deceived,
though you are. But come, let's hear, how do you know
what you affirm so confidently?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Why, I'll tell you all. Frank Harcourt coming
to me this morning to wish me joy, and present his service
to you, I asked him if he could help me to a parson.
Whereupon he told me, he had a brother in town who was
in orders; and he went straight away, and sent him, you
see there, to me.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Yes, Frank goes and puts on a black coat, then
tells you he is Ned; that's all you have for't.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! pshaw! I tell you, by the same token,
the midwife put her garter about Frank's neck, to know
'em asunder, they were so like.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_311" id="Page_311">[Pg 311]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Frank tells you this too?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay, and Ned there too: nay, they are both in
a story.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> So, so; very foolish.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Lord, if you won't believe one, you had best
try him by your chambermaid there; for chambermaids
must needs know chaplains from other men, they are so
used to 'em.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Let's see: nay, I'll be sworn he has the canonical
smirk, and the filthy clammy palm of a chaplain.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Well, most reverend doctor, pray let us make an
end of this fooling.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> With all my soul, divine heavenly creature, when
you please.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> He speaks like a chaplain indeed.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Why, was there not soul, divine, heavenly, in
what he said?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Once more, most impertinent black coat, cease
your persecution, and let us have a conclusion of this
ridiculous love.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I had forgot, I must suit my style to my coat, or
I wear it in vain. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I have no more patience left; let us make once
an end of this troublesome love, I say.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> So be it, seraphic lady, when your honour shall
think it meet and convenient so to do.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> 'Gad I'm sure none but a chaplain could speak
so, I think.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Let me tell you, sir, this dull trick will not serve
your turn; though you delay our marriage, you shall not
hinder it.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Far be it from me, munificent patroness, to delay
your marriage; I desire nothing more than to marry you
presently, which I might do, if you yourself would; for
my noble, good-natured, and thrice generous patron here
would not hinder it.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, poor man, not I, faith.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_312" id="Page_312">[Pg 312]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Har.</i> And now, madam, let me tell you plainly nobody
else shall marry you; by Heavens! I'll die first, for I'm
sure I should die after it.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> How his love has made him forget his function,
as I have seen it in real parsons!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> That was spoken like a chaplain too? now you
understand him, I hope.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Poor man, he takes it heinously to be refused;
I can't blame him, 'tis putting an indignity upon him, not
to be suffered; but you'll pardon me, madam, it shan't
be; he shall marry us; come away, pray madam.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Ha! ha! he! more ado! 'tis late.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Invincible stupidity! I tell you, he would marry
me as your rival, not as your chaplain.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, come, madam. [<i>Pulling her away.</i></p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> I pray, madam, do not refuse this reverend divine
the honour and satisfaction of marrying you; for I dare
say, he has set his heart upon't, good doctor.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> What can you hope or design by this?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I could answer her, a reprieve for a day only,
often revokes a hasty doom. At worst, if she will not
take mercy on me, and let me marry her, I have at least
the lover's second pleasure, hindering my rival's enjoyment,
though but for a time. [<i>Aside</i>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, madam, 'tis e'en twelve o'clock, and my
mother charged me never to be married out of the canonical
hours. Come, come; Lord, here's such a deal of
modesty, I warrant, the first day.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Yes, an't please your worship, married women
show all their modesty the first day, because married men
show all their love the first day. [<i>Exeunt.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_313" id="Page_313">[Pg 313]</a></span></p>


<h4>SCENE II.—<i>A Bedchamber in</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife's</span> <i>House.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>discovered.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, tell me, I say.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Lord! han't I told it a hundred times
over?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] I would try, if in the repetition of the
ungrateful tale, I could find her altering it in the least
circumstance; for if her story be false, she is so too.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Come, how was't, baggage?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Lord, what pleasure you take to hear it
sure!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, you take more in telling it I find; but
speak, how was't?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> He carried me up into the house next to
the Exchange.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So, and you two were only in the room!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, for he sent away a youth that was
there, for some dried fruit, and China oranges.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Did he so? Damn him for it—and for—</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> But presently came up the gentlewoman
of the house.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> O, 'twas well she did; but what did he do
whilst the fruit came?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> He kissed me a hundred times, and told
me he fancied he kissed my fine sister, meaning me, you
know, whom he said he loved with all his soul, and bid me
be sure to tell her so, and to desire her to be at her window,
by eleven of the clock this morning, and he would walk
under it at that time.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> And he was as good as his word, very punctual;
a pox reward him for't. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Well, and he said if you were not within,
he would come up to her, meaning me, you know, bud,
still.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So—he knew her certainly; but for<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_314" id="Page_314">[Pg 314]</a></span>
this confession, I am obliged to her simplicity.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
But what, you stood very still when he kissed you?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, I warrant you; would you have had
me discovered myself?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But you told me he did some beastliness to you,
as you call it; what was't?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Why, he put—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Why, he put the tip of his tongue
between my lips, and so mousled me—and I said, I'd
bite it.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> An eternal canker seize it, for a dog!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, you need not be so angry with him
neither, for to say truth, he has the sweetest breath I
ever knew.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> The devil! you were satisfied with it then, and
would do it again?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Not unless he should force me.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Force you, changeling! I tell you, no woman
can be forced.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, but she may sure, by such a one as
he, for he's a proper, goodly, strong man; 'tis hard, let
me tell you, to resist him.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, 'tis plain she loves him, yet she has
not love enough to make her conceal it from me; but the
sight of him will increase her aversion for me and love for
him; and that love instruct her how to deceive me and
satisfy him, all idiot as she is. Love! 'twas he gave
women first their craft, their art of deluding. Out of
Nature's hands they came plain, open, silly, and fit for
slaves, as she and Heaven intended 'em; but damned
Love—well—I must strangle that little monster whilst I
can deal with him.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Go fetch pen, ink, and
paper out of the next room.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, bud. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Why should women have more invention in love
than men? It can only be, because they have more<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_315" id="Page_315">[Pg 315]</a></span>
desires, more soliciting passions, more lust, and more of
the devil.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p>Come, minx, sit down and write.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Ay, dear bud, but I can't do't very
well.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I wish you could not at all.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> But what should I write for?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I'll have you write a letter to your lover.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O Lord, to the fine gentleman a letter!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Yes, to the fine gentleman.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Lord, you do but jeer: sure you jest.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I am not so merry: come, write as I bid
you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What, do you think I am a fool?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] She's afraid I would not dictate any love
to him, therefore she's unwilling.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] But you had
best begin.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Indeed, and indeed, but I won't, so I
won't.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Why?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Because he's in town; you may send for
him if you will.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Very well, you would have him brought to you;
is it come to this? I say, take the pen and write, or you'll
provoke me.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Lord, what d'ye make a fool of me for?
Don't I know that letters are never writ but from the
country to London, and from London into the country?
Now he's in town, and I am in town too; therefore I can't
write to him, you know.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, I am glad it is no worse; she is
innocent enough yet.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Yes, you may, when
your husband bids you, write letters to people that are
in town.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O, may I so? then I'm satisfied.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, begin:—"Sir"—[<i>Dictates.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_316" id="Page_316">[Pg 316]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Shan't I say, "Dear Sir?"—You know one
says always something more than bare "sir."</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Write as I bid you, or I will write whore with
this penknife in your face.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, good bud—"Sir"—[<i>Writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> "Though I suffered last night your nauseous,
loathed kisses and embraces"—Write!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch</i> Nay, why should I say so? You know I
told you he had a sweet breath.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Write!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Let me but put out "loathed."</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Write, I say!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Well then. [<i>Writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Let's see, what have you writ?—[<i>Takes the
paper and reads.</i>] "Though I suffered last night your
kisses and embraces"—Thou impudent creature! where
is "nauseous" and "loathed?"</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> I can't abide to write such filthy words.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Once more write as I'd have you, and question
it not, or I will spoil thy writing with this. I will stab
out those eyes that cause my mischief.
[<i>Holds up the penknife.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O Lord! I will.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> So—so—let's see now.—[<i>Reads.</i>] "Though I
suffered last night your nauseous, loathed kisses and
embraces"—go on—"yet I would not have you presume
that you shall ever repeat them"—so—[<i>She writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> I have writ it.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> On, then—"I then concealed myself from your
knowledge, to avoid your insolencies."—[<i>She writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> So—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> "The same reason, now I am out of your
hands—" [<i>She writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> So—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> "Makes me own to you my unfortunate, though
innocent frolic, of being in man's clothes"—[<i>She writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> So—</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_317" id="Page_317">[Pg 317]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> "That you may for evermore cease to pursue
her, who hates and detests you"—[<i>She writes on.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> So—heigh! [<i>Sighs.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, do you sigh?—"detests you—as much
as she loves her husband and her honour—"</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> I vow, husband, he'll ne'er believe I
should write such a letter.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, he'd expect a kinder from you? Come,
now your name only.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What, shan't I say "Your most faithful
humble servant till death?"</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, tormenting fiend!—[<i>Aside.</i>] Her style, I
find, would be very soft.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Come, wrap it up
now whilst I go fetch wax and a candle; and write on
the backside, "For Mr. Horner." [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> "For Mr. Horner."—So, I am glad he
has told me his name. Dear Mr. Horner! but why
should I send thee such a letter that will vex thee, and
make thee angry with me?—Well, I will not send it.—Ay,
but then my husband will kill me—for I see plainly
he won't let me love Mr. Horner—but what care I for
my husband?—I won't, so I won't, send poor Mr.
Horner such a letter—But then my husband—but oh,
what if I writ at bottom my husband made me write it?—Ay,
but then my husband would see't—Can one have no
shift? ah, a London woman would have had a hundred
presently. Stay—what if I should write a letter, and
wrap it up like this, and write upon't too? Ay, but then
my husband would see't—I don't know what to do.—But
yet evads I'll try, so I will—for I will not send this
letter to poor Mr. Horner, come what will on't.</p>

<p>"Dear, sweet Mr. Horner"—[<i>Writes and repeats what
she writes.</i>]—so—"my husband would have me send you
a base, rude, unmannerly letter; but I won't"—so—"and
would have me forbid you loving me; but I won't"—so—"and
would have me say to you, I hate you, poor
Mr. Horner; but I won't tell a lie for him"—there—"for<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_318" id="Page_318">[Pg 318]</a></span>
I'm sure if you and I were in the country at cards
together"—so—"I could not help treading on your toe
under the table"—so—"or rubbing knees with you, and
staring in your face, till you saw me"—very well—"and
then looking down, and blushing for an hour together"—so—"but
I must make haste before my husband
comes: and now he has taught me to write letters,
you shall have longer ones from me, who am, dear,
dear, poor, dear Mr. Horner, your most humble friend,
and servant to command till death,—Margery Pinchwife."</p>

<p>Stay, I must give him a hint at bottom—so—now wrap
it up just like t'other—so—now write "For Mr. Horner"—But
oh now, what shall I do with it? for here comes
my husband.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] I have been detained by a sparkish
coxcomb, who pretended a visit to me; but I fear 'twas
to my wife—[<i>Aloud.</i>] What, have you done?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Ay, ay, bud, just now.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Let's see't: what d'ye tremble for? what, you
would not have it go?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Here—[<i>Aside.</i>] No, I must not give him
that: so I had been served if I had given him this.
[<i>He opens and reads the first letter.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, where's the wax and seal?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Lord, what shall I do now? Nay,
then I have it—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Pray let me see't. Lord, you
think me so arrant a fool, I cannot seal a letter; I will
do't, so I will.
[<i>Snatches the letter from him, changes it for the other,
seals it, and delivers it to him.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Nay, I believe you will learn that, and other
things too, which I would not have you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> So, han't I done it curiously<a name="FNanchor_77_77" id="FNanchor_77_77"></a><a href="#Footnote_77_77" class="fnanchor">[77]</a>?—[<i>Aside.</i>]<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_319" id="Page_319">[Pg 319]</a></span>
I think I have; there's my letter going to Mr. Horner,
since he'll needs have me send letters to folks.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Tis very well; but I warrant, you would not
have it go now?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, indeed, but I would, bud, now.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, you are a good girl then. Come, let me
lock you up in your chamber, till I come back; and be
sure you come not within three strides of the window
when I am gone, for I have a spy in the street.—[<i>Exit</i>
Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife, Pinchwife</span> <i>locks the door.</i>] At least, 'tis
fit she think so. If we do not cheat women, they'll
cheat us, and fraud may be justly used with secret
enemies, of which a wife is the most dangerous; and he
that has a handsome one to keep, and a frontier town,
must provide against treachery, rather than open force.
Now I have secured all within, I'll deal with the foe
without, with false intelligence.
[<i>Holds up the letter. Exit.</i></p>


<h4>SCENE III.—<span class="smcap">Horner's</span> <i>Lodging</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span> <i>and</i> Quack.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Well, sir, how fadges<a name="FNanchor_78_78" id="FNanchor_78_78"></a><a href="#Footnote_78_78" class="fnanchor">[78]</a> the new design? have
you not the luck of all your brother projectors, to deceive
only yourself at last?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, good domine doctor, I deceive you, it
seems, and others too; for the grave matrons, and old,
rigid husbands think me as unfit for love, as they are;
but their wives, sisters, and daughters know, some of
'em, better things already.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Already!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Already, I say. Last night I was drunk with
half-a-dozen of your civil persons, as you call 'em, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_320" id="Page_320">[Pg 320]</a></span>
people of honour, and so was made free of their society
and dressing-rooms for ever hereafter; and am already
come to the privileges of sleeping upon their pallets,
warming smocks, tying shoes and garters, and the like,
doctor, already, already, doctor.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> You have made good use of your time, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I tell thee, I am now no more interruption to
'em, when they sing, or talk bawdy, than a little squab
French page who speaks no English.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> But do civil persons and women of honour
drink, and sing bawdy songs?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> O, amongst friends, amongst friends. For your
bigots in honour are just like those in religion; they fear
the eye of the world more than the eye of Heaven; and
think there is no virtue, but railing at vice, and no sin,
but giving scandal. They rail at a poor, little, kept
player, and keep themselves some young, modest pulpit
comedian to be privy to their sins in their closets, not
to tell 'em of them in their chapels.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Nay, the truth on't is, priests, amongst the
women now, have quite got the better of us lay-confessors,
physicians.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And they are rather their patients; but—</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, <i>looking about her.</i></p>

<p>Now we talk of women of honour, here comes one. Step
behind the screen there, and but observe, if I have not
particular privileges with the women of reputation already,
doctor, already. [Quack <i>retires.</i></p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Well, Horner, am not I a woman of honour?
you see, I'm as good as my word.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And you shall see, madam, I'll not be behindhand
with you in honour; and I'll be as good as my
word too, if you please but to withdraw into the next
room.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But first, my dear sir, you must promise to
have a care of my dear honour.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_321" id="Page_321">[Pg 321]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> If you talk a word more of your honour,
you'll make me incapable to wrong it. To talk of
honour in the mysteries of love, is like talking of Heaven
or the Deity, in an operation of witchcraft, just when
you are employing the devil: it makes the charm
impotent.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Nay, fy! let us not be smutty. But you
talk of mysteries and bewitching to me; I don't understand
you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I tell you, madam, the word money in a
mistress's mouth, at such a nick of time, is not a more
disheartening sound to a younger brother, than that of
honour to an eager lover like myself.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> But you can't blame a lady of my reputation
to be chary.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Chary! I have been chary of it already, by the
report I have caused of myself.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Ay, but if you should ever let other women
know that dear secret, it would come out. Nay, you
must have a great care of your conduct; for my acquaintance
are so censorious, (oh, 'tis a wicked, censorious
world, Mr. Horner!) I say, are so censorious, and detracting,
that perhaps they'll talk to the prejudice of my
honour, though you should not let them know the dear
secret.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, madam, rather than they shall prejudice
your honour, I'll prejudice theirs; and, to serve
you, I'll lie with 'em all, make the secret their own,
and then they'll keep it. I am a Machiavel in love,
madam.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> O, no sir, not that way.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, the devil take me, if censorious women
are to be silenced any other way.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> A secret is better kept, I hope, by a single
person than a multitude; therefore pray do not trust any
body else with it, dear, dear Mr. Horner.
[<i>Embracing him.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_322" id="Page_322">[Pg 322]</a></span></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> How now!</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O my husband!—prevented—and
what's almost as bad, found with my arms about another
man—that will appear too much—what shall I say?—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Sir Jasper, come hither: I am trying if Mr.
Horner were ticklish, and he's as ticklish as can be. I
love to torment the confounded toad; let you and I
tickle him.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> No, your ladyship will tickle him better
without me, I suppose. But is this your buying china?
I thought you had been at the china-house.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] China-house! that's my cue, I must
take it.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] A pox! can't you keep your impertinent
wives at home? Some men are troubled with the
husbands, but I with the wives; but I'd have you to
know, since I cannot be your journeyman by night, I
will not be your drudge by day, to squire your wife about,
and be your man of straw, or scarecrow only to pies and
jays, that would be nibbling at your forbidden fruit; I
shall be shortly the hackney gentleman-usher of the town.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] He! he! he! poor fellow, he's in
the right on't, faith. To squire women about for other
folks is as ungrateful an employment, as to tell money
for other folks.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] He! he! he! be'n't angry,
Horner.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> No, 'tis I have more reason to be angry,
who am left by you, to go abroad indecently alone; or,
what is more indecent, to pin myself upon such ill-bred
people of your acquaintance as this is.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nay, prithee, what has he done?</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Nay, he has done nothing.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> But what d'ye take ill, if he has done
nothing?</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Ha! ha! ha! faith, I can't but laugh however;
why, d'ye think the unmannerly toad would come<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_323" id="Page_323">[Pg 323]</a></span>
down to me to the coach? I was fain to come up to
fetch him, or go without him, which I was resolved not
to do; for he knows china very well, and has himself
very good, but will not let me see it, lest I should beg
some; but I will find it out, and have what I came for
yet.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Apart to</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, <i>as he follows her to the
door.</i>] Lock the door, madam.—[<i>Exit</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, <i>and
locks the door.</i>]—[<i>Aloud.</i>] So, she has got into my
chamber and locked me out. Oh the impertinency of
woman-kind! Well, Sir Jasper, plain-dealing is a jewel;
if ever you suffer your wife to trouble me again here, she
shall carry you home a pair of horns; by my lord mayor
she shall; though I cannot furnish you myself, you are
sure, yet I'll find a way.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ha! ha! he!—[<i>Aside.</i>] At my first coming
in, and finding her arms about him, tickling him it seems,
I was half jealous, but now I see my folly.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
He! he! he! poor Horner.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, though you laugh now, 'twill be my turn
ere long. Oh women, more impertinent, more cunning,
and more mischievous than their monkeys, and to me
almost as ugly!—Now is she throwing my things about
and rifling all I have; but I'll get into her the back way,
and so rifle her for it.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ha! ha! ha! poor angry Horner.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Stay here a little, I'll ferret her out to you
presently, I warrant. <i>Exit at the other door.</i>
[Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper</span> <i>talks through the door to his</i> Wife,
<i>she answers from within.</i></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Wife! my Lady Fidget! wife! he is coming
in to you the back way.</p>

<p><i>Lady Fid.</i> Let him come, and welcome, which way he
will.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He'll catch you, and use you roughly, and
be too strong for you.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Don't you trouble yourself, let him if he can.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_324" id="Page_324">[Pg 324]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] This indeed I could not have believed
from him, nor any but my own eyes.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Where's this woman-hater, this toad,
this ugly, greasy, dirty sloven?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, the women all will have him
ugly; methinks he is a comely person, but his wants
make his form contemptible to 'em; and 'tis e'en as my
wife said yesterday, talking of him, that a proper handsome
eunuch was as ridiculous a thing as a gigantic
coward.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Sir Jasper, your servant: where is the
odious beast?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He's within in his chamber, with my wife;
she's playing the wag with him.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Is she so? and he's a clownish beast,
he'll give her no quarter, he'll play the wag with her
again, let me tell you: come, let's go help her—What,
the door's locked?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, my wife locked it.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Did she so? let's break it open then.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> No, no, he'll do her no hurt.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] But is there no other way to get
in to 'em? whither goes this? I will disturb 'em.
[<i>Exit at another door.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Old Lady <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Where is this harlotry, this impudent
baggage, this rambling tomrigg?<a name="FNanchor_79_79" id="FNanchor_79_79"></a><a href="#Footnote_79_79" class="fnanchor">[79]</a> O Sir Jasper, I'm glad
to see you here; did you not see my vile grandchild
come in hither just now?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Yes.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Ay, but where is she then? where is she?
Lord, Sir Jasper, I have e'en rattled myself to pieces in
pursuit of her: but can you tell what she makes here?
they say below, no woman lodges here.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_325" id="Page_325">[Pg 325]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> No.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> No! what does she here then? say, if it
be not a woman's lodging, what makes she here? But
are you sure no woman lodges here?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> No, nor no man neither, this is Mr. Horner's
lodging.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Is it so, are you sure?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Yes, yes.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> So; then there's no hurt in't, I hope. But
where is he?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He's in the next room with my wife.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Nay, if you trust him with your wife, I
may with my Biddy. They say, he's a merry harmless
man now, e'en as harmless a man as ever came out of
Italy with a good voice, and as pretty, harmless company
for a lady, as a snake without his teeth.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, ay, poor man.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> I can't find 'em.—Oh, are you here,
grandmother? I followed, you must know, my Lady
Fidget hither; 'tis the prettiest lodging, and I have been
staring on the prettiest pictures—</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span> <i>with a piece of china in her hand,
and</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span> <i>following.</i></p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> And I have been toiling and moiling for the
prettiest piece of china, my dear.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, she has been too hard for me, do what I
could.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Oh, lord, I'll have some china too.
Good Mr. Horner, don't think to give other people china,
and me none; come in with me too.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Upon my honour, I have none left now.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Nay, nay, I have known you deny your
china before now, but you shan't put me off so. Come.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> This lady had the last there.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_326" id="Page_326">[Pg 326]</a></span></p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Yes indeed, madam, to my certain knowledge,
he has no more left.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> O, but it may be he may have some you
could not find.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> What, d'ye think if he had had any left, I
would not have had it too? for we women of quality
never think we have china enough.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Do not take it ill, I cannot make china for
you all, but I will have a roll-waggon for you too, another
time.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Thank you, dear toad.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> What do you mean by that promise?
[<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Alas, she has an innocent, literal understanding.
[<i>Aside to</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Poor Mr. Horner! he has enough to do
to please you all, I see.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, madam, you see how they use me.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Poor gentleman, I pity you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I thank you, madam: I could never find pity,
but from such reverend ladies as you are; the young ones
will never spare a man.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Come, come, beast, and go dine with
us; for we shall want a man at ombre after dinner.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> That's all their use of me, madam, you see.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Come, sloven, I'll lead you, to be sure
of you. [<i>Pulls him by the cravat.</i></p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Alas, poor man, how she tugs him! Kiss,
kiss her; that's the way to make such nice women quiet.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, madam, that remedy is worse than the torment;
they know I dare suffer anything rather than do it.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Prithee kiss her, and I'll give you her picture
in little, that you admired so last night; prithee do.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, nothing but that could bribe me: I love
a woman only in effigy, and good painting as much as I
hate them.—I'll do't, for I could adore the devil well
painted. [<i>Kisses</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_327" id="Page_327">[Pg 327]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Foh, you filthy toad! nay, now I've
done jesting.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> Ha! ha I ha! I told you so.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Foh! a kiss of his—</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Has no more hurt in't than one of my
spaniel's.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Nor no more good neither.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> I will now believe anything he tells me. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> O lord, here's a man! Sir Jasper, my mask,
my mask! I would not be seen here for the world.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> What, not when I am with you?</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> No, no, my honour—let's be gone.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Oh grandmother, let's be gone; make
haste, make haste, I know not how he may censure us.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Be found in the lodging of anything like a
man!—Away.
[<i>Exeunt</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>, Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, Old
Lady <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>, <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> What's here? another cuckold? he looks like one,
and none else sure have any business with him. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, what brings my dear friend hither?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Your impertinency.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> My impertinency!—why, you gentlemen that
have got handsome wives, think you have a privilege of
saying anything to your friends, and are as brutish as if
you were our creditors.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No, sir, I'll ne'er trust you any way.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But why not, dear Jack? why diffide in me thou
know'st so well?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Because I do know you so well.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Han't I been always thy friend, honest Jack,
always ready to serve thee, in love or battle, before thou
wert married, and am so still?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I believe so, you would be my second now,
indeed.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_328" id="Page_328">[Pg 328]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well then, dear Jack, why so unkind, so grum,
so strange to me? Come, prithee kiss me, dear rogue:
gad I was always, I say, and am still as much thy servant
as—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> As I am yours, sir. What, you would send a
kiss to my wife, is that it?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, there 'tis—a man can't show his friendship
to a married man, but presently he talks of his wife to
you. Prithee, let thy wife alone, and let thee and I be
all one, as we were wont. What, thou art as shy of my
kindness, as a Lombard-street alderman of a courtier's
civility at Locket's!<a name="FNanchor_80_80" id="FNanchor_80_80"></a><a href="#Footnote_80_80" class="fnanchor">[80]</a></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But you are over-kind to me, as kind as if I
were your cuckold already; yet I must confess you ought
to be kind and civil to me, since I am so kind, so civil
to you, as to bring you this: look you there, sir.
[<i>Delivers him a letter.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What is't?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Only a love-letter, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> From whom?—how! this is from your wife—hum—and
hum—[<i>Reads.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Even from my wife, sir: am I not wondrous
kind and civil to you now too?—[<i>Aside.</i>] But you'll not
think her so.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ha! is this a trick of his or hers? [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> The gentleman's surprised I find.—What, you
expected a kinder letter?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No faith, not I, how could I?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Yes, yes, I'm sure you did. A man so well
made as you are, must needs be disappointed, if the
women declare not their passion at first sight or opportunity.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] But what should this mean? Stay, the
postscript.—[<i>Reads aside.</i>] "Be sure you love me, whatsoever
my husband says to the contrary, and let him not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_329" id="Page_329">[Pg 329]</a></span>
see this, lest he should come home and pinch me, or kill
my squirrel."—It seems he knows not what the letter
contains.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, ne'er wonder at it so much.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Faith, I can't help it.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Now, I think I have deserved your infinite
friendship and kindness, and have showed myself
sufficiently an obliging kind friend and husband; am I
not so, to bring a letter from my wife to her gallant?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, the devil take me, art thou, the most
obliging, kind friend and husband in the world, ha! ha!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, you may be merry, sir; but in short I
must tell you, sir, my honour will suffer no jesting.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What dost thou mean?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Does the letter want a comment? Then, know,
sir, though I have been so civil a husband, as to bring
you a letter from my wife, to let you kiss and court her
to my face, I will not be a cuckold, sir, I will not.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Thou art mad with jealousy. I never saw thy
wife in my life but at the play yesterday, and I know not
if it were she or no. I court her, kiss her!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I will not be a cuckold, I say; there will be
danger in making me a cuckold.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, wert thou not well cured of thy last clap?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I wear a sword.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> It should be taken from thee, lest thou shouldst
do thyself a mischief with it; thou art mad, man.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> As mad as I am, and as merry as you are,
I must have more reason from you ere we part. I
say again, though you kissed and courted last night my
wife in man's clothes, as she confesses in her letter—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ha! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Both she and I say, you must not design it
again, for you have mistaken your woman, as you have
done your man.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O—I understand something now—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Was that thy wife! Why wouldst thou not tell<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_330" id="Page_330">[Pg 330]</a></span>
me 'twas she? Faith, my freedom with her was your
fault, not mine.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Faith, so 'twas. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Fy! I'd never do't to a woman before her
husband's face, sure.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But I had rather you should do't to my wife
before my face, than behind my back; and that you shall
never do.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No—you will hinder me.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> If I would not hinder you, you see by her letter
she would.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, I must e'en acquiesce then, and be contented
with what she writes.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I'll assure you 'twas voluntarily writ; I had no
hand in't you may believe me.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I do believe thee, faith.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> And believe her too, for she's an innocent
creature, has no dissembling in her: and so fare you
well, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Pray, however, present my humble service to
her, and tell her, I will obey her letter to a tittle, and
fulfil her desires, be what they will, or with what difficulty
soever I do't; and you shall be no more jealous of me, I
warrant her, and you.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well then, fare you well; and play with any
man's honour but mine, kiss any man's wife but mine, and
welcome. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ha! ha! ha! doctor.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> It seems, he has not heard the report of you,
or does not believe it.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ha! ha!—now, doctor, what think you?</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Pray let's see the letter—hum—"for—dear—love
you—" [<i>Reads the letter.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I wonder how she could contrive it! What
say'st thou to't? 'tis an original.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> So are your cuckolds too originals: for they
are like no other common cuckolds, and I will henceforth<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_331" id="Page_331">[Pg 331]</a></span>
believe it not impossible for you to cuckold the Grand
Signior amidst his guards of eunuchs, that I say.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And I say for the letter, 'tis the first love-letter
that ever was without flames, darts, fates, destinies, lying
and dissembling in't.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span> <i>pulling in</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come back, you are a pretty brother-in-law,
neither go to church nor to dinner with your sister bride!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> My sister denies her marriage, and you see is
gone away from you dissatisfied.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! upon a foolish scruple, that our parson
was not in lawful orders, and did not say all the common-prayer;
but 'tis her modesty only I believe. But let all
women be never so modest the first day, they'll be sure to
come to themselves by night, and I shall have enough of
her then. In the mean time, Harry Horner, you must
dine with me: I keep my wedding at my aunt's in the
Piazza.<a name="FNanchor_81_81" id="FNanchor_81_81"></a><a href="#Footnote_81_81" class="fnanchor">[81]</a></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Thy wedding! what stale maid has lived to
despair of a husband, or what young one of a gallant?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> O, your servant, sir—this gentleman's sister
then,—no stale maid.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I'm sorry for't.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How comes he so concerned for her? [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> You sorry for't? why, do you know any ill by
her?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, I know none but by thee; 'tis for her sake,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_332" id="Page_332">[Pg 332]</a></span>
not yours, and another man's sake that might have hoped,
I thought.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Another man! another man! what is his
name?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, since 'tis past, he shall be nameless.—[<i>Aside.</i>]
Poor Harcourt! I am sorry thou hast missed her.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> He seems to be much troubled at the match.
[<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Prithee, tell me—Nay, you shan't go, brother.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I must of necessity, but I'll come to you to
dinner. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> But, Harry, what, have I a rival in my wife
already? But with all my heart, for he may be of use to
me hereafter; for though my hunger is now my sauce,
and I can fall on heartily without, the time will come,
when a rival will be as good sauce for a married man to a
wife, as an orange to veal.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> O thou damned rogue! thou hast set my teeth
on edge with thy orange.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Then let's to dinner—there I was with you
again. Come.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But who dines with thee?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> My friends and relations, my brother Pinchwife,
you see, of your acquaintance.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And his wife?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, 'gad, he'll ne'er let her come amongst us
good fellows; your stingy country coxcomb keeps his
wife from his friends, as he does his little firkin of ale, for
his own drinking, and a gentleman can't get a smack
on't; but his servants, when his back is turned, broach it
at their pleasures, and dust it away, ha! ha! ha!—'Gad,
I am witty, I think, considering I was married to-day, by
the world; but come—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, I will not dine with you, unless you can
fetch her too.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Pshaw! what pleasure canst thou have with
women now, Harry?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_333" id="Page_333">[Pg 333]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> My eyes are not gone; I love a good prospect
yet, and will not dine with you unless she does too; go
fetch her, therefore, but do not tell her husband 'tis for
my sake.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Well, I'll go try what I can do; in the meantime,
come away to my aunt's lodging, 'tis in the way to
Pinchwife's.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> The poor woman has called for aid, and
stretched forth her hand, doctor; I cannot but help her
over the pale out of the briars. [<i>Exeunt.</i></p>


<h4>SCENE IV.—<i>A Room in</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife's</span> <i>House.</i></h4>

<p class="center">Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>alone, leaning on her elbow.—A table,
pen, ink and paper.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Well, 'tis e'en so, I have got the London
disease they call love; I am sick of my husband, and for
my gallant. I have heard this distemper called a fever,
but methinks 'tis like an ague; for when I think of my
husband, I tremble, and am in a cold sweat, and have
inclinations to vomit; but when I think of my gallant,
dear Mr. Horner, my hot fit comes, and I am all in a
fever indeed; and, as in other fevers, my own chamber
is tedious to me, and I would fain be removed to his, and
then methinks I should be well. Ah, poor Mr. Horner!
Well, I cannot, will not stay here; therefore I'll make an
end of my letter to him, which shall be a finer letter than
my last, because I have studied it like anything. Oh
sick, sick! [<i>Takes the pen and writes.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>, <i>who seeing her writing, steals softly
behind her and looking over her shoulder, snatches the
paper from her.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, writing more letters?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_334" id="Page_334">[Pg 334]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O Lord, bud, why d'ye fright me so?
[<i>She offers to run out; he stops her, and reads.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How's this? nay, you shall not stir, madam:—"Dear,
dear, dear Mr. Horner"—very well—I have
taught you to write letters to good purpose—but let us
see't. "First, I am to beg your pardon for my boldness in
writing to you, which I'd have you to know I would not
have done, had not you said first you loved me so
extremely, which if you do, you will never suffer me to
lie in the arms of another man whom I loathe, nauseate,
and detest."—Now you can write these filthy words.
But what follows?—"Therefore, I hope you will speedily
find some way to free me from this unfortunate match,
which was never, I assure you, of my choice, but I'm
afraid 'tis already too far gone; however, if you love me,
as I do you, you will try what you can do; but you
must help me away before to-morrow, or else, alas! I
shall be for ever out of your reach, for I can defer no
longer our—our—" what is to follow "our"?—speak,
what—our journey into the country I suppose—Oh
woman, damned woman! and Love, damned Love, their
old tempter! for this is one of his miracles; in a moment
he can make those blind that could see, and those see
that were blind, those dumb that could speak, and those
prattle who were dumb before; nay, what is more than
all, make these dough-baked, senseless, indocile animals,
women, too hard for us their politic lords and rulers, in a
moment. But make an end of your letter, and then I'll
make an end of you thus, and all my plagues together.
[<i>Draws his sword.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O Lord, O Lord, you are such a passionate
man, bud!</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> How now, what's here to do?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> This fool here now!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> What! drawn upon your wife? You should
never do that, but at night in the dark, when you can't<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_335" id="Page_335">[Pg 335]</a></span>
hurt her. This is my sister-in-law, is it not? ay, faith, e'en
our country Margery; [<i>Pulls aside her handkerchief</i>] one
may know her. Come, she and you must go dine with
me; dinner's ready, come. But where's my wife? is she
not come home yet? where is she?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Making you a cuckold; 'tis that they all do, as
soon as they can.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> What, the wedding-day? no, a wife that designs
to make a cully of her husband will be sure to let him
win the first stake of love, by the world. But come, they
stay dinner for us: come, I'll lead down our Margery.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No—sir, go, we'll follow you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> I will not wag without you.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> This coxcomb is a sensible torment to me
amidst the greatest in the world. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, come, Madam Margery.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No; I'll lead her my way: what, would you
treat your friends with mine, for want of your own wife?—[<i>Leads
her to the other door, and locks her in and returns.</i>]
I am contented my rage should take breath—[<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> I told Horner this.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come now.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Lord, how shy you are of your wife! but let
me tell you, brother, we men of wit have amongst us a
saying, that cuckolding, like the small-pox, comes with a
fear; and you may keep your wife as much as you will out
of danger of infection, but if her constitution incline her
to't, she'll have it sooner or later, by the world, say they.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] What a thing is a cuckold, that every
fool can make him ridiculous!—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Well, sir—but
let me advise you, now you are come to be concerned,
because you suspect the danger, not to neglect the means
to prevent it, especially when the greatest share of the
malady will light upon your own head, for</p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Hows'e'er the kind wife's belly comes to swell,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The husband breeds for her, and first is ill.</span><br />
</p>

<p>[<i>Exeunt.</i></p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_336" id="Page_336">[Pg 336]</a></span></p>




<h3>ACT THE FIFTH.</h3>


<h4>SCENE I.—<span class="smcap">Pinchwife's</span> <i>House.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>. <i>A table
and candle.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, take the pen and make
an end of the letter, just as you intended;
if you are false in a tittle, I
shall soon perceive it, and punish you
as you deserve.—[<i>Lays his hand on his
sword.</i>] Write what was to follow—let's
see—"You must make haste, and help me away before
to-morrow, or else I shall be for ever out of your reach,
for I can defer no longer our"—What follows "our"?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Must all out, then, bud?—Look you
there, then. [Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>takes the pen and writes.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Let's see—"For I can defer no longer
our—wedding—Your slighted Alithea."—What's the meaning
of this? my sister's name to't? speak, unriddle.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, indeed, bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But why her name to't? speak—speak, I say.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Ay, but you'll tell her then again. If you
would not tell her again—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I will not:—I am stunned, my head turns
round.—Speak.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Won't you tell her, indeed, and indeed?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> No; speak, I say.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> She'll be angry with me; but I had
rather she should be angry with me than you, bud;<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_337" id="Page_337">[Pg 337]</a></span>
and, to tell you the truth, 'twas she made me write the
letter, and taught me what I should write.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Ha!—I thought the style was somewhat
better than her own.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Could she come
to you to teach you, since I had locked you up alone?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O, through the key-hole, bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But why should she make you write a letter for
her to him, since she can write herself?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Why, she said because—for I was unwilling
to do it—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Because what—because?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Because, lest Mr. Horner should be
cruel, and refuse her; or be vain afterwards, and show
the letter, she might disown it, the hand not being
hers.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] How's this? Ha!—then I think I shall
come to myself again.—This changeling could not invent
this lie: but if she could, why should she? she might
think I should soon discover it.—Stay—now I think on't
too, Horner said he was sorry she had married Sparkish;
and her disowning her marriage to me makes me think
she has evaded it for Horner's sake: yet why should she
take this course? But men in love are fools; women
may well be so—[<i>Aloud.</i>] But hark you, madam, your
sister went out in the morning, and I have not seen her
within since.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Alack-a-day, she has been crying all day
above, it seems, in a corner.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Where is she? let me speak with her.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] O Lord, then she'll discover
all!—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Pray hold, bud; what, d'ye mean to discover
me? she'll know I have told you then. Pray, bud,
let me talk with her first.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I must speak with her, to know whether Horner
ever made her any promise, and whether she be married
to Sparkish or no.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray, dear bud, don't, till I have spoken<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_338" id="Page_338">[Pg 338]</a></span>
with her, and told her that I have told you all; for she'll
kill me else.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Go then, and bid her come out to me.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Yes, yes, bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Let me see—[<i>Pausing.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] I'll go, but she is not within to
come to him: I have just got time to know of Lucy her
maid, who first set me on work, what lie I shall tell next;
for I am e'en at my wit's end. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, I resolve it, Horner shall have her: I'd
rather give him my sister than lend him my wife; and
such an alliance will prevent his pretensions to my wife,
sure. I'll make him of kin to her, and then he won't care
for her.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O Lord, bud! I told you what anger you
would make me with my sister.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Won't she come hither?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> No, no. Lack-a-day, she's ashamed to
look you in the face: and she says, if you go in to her,
she'll run away down stairs, and shamefully go herself to
Mr. Horner, who has promised her marriage, she says;
and she will have no other, so she won't.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Did he so?—promise her marriage!—then she
shall have no other. Go tell her so; and if she will come
and discourse with me a little concerning the means, I will
about it immediately. Go.—[<i>Exit</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.] His
estate is equal to Sparkish's, and his extraction as much
better than his, as his parts are; but my chief reason is,
I'd rather be akin to him by the name of brother-in-law
than that of cuckold.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p>Well, what says she now?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Why, she says, she would only have you
lead her to Horner's lodging; with whom she first will
discourse the matter before she talks with you, which yet<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_339" id="Page_339">[Pg 339]</a></span>
she cannot do; for alack, poor creature, she says she
can't so much as look you in the face, therefore she'll
come to you in a mask. And you must excuse her, if
she make you no answer to any question of yours, till you
have brought her to Mr. Horner; and if you will not
chide her, nor question her, she'll come out to you
immediately.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Let her come: I will not speak a word to her,
nor require a word from her.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Oh, I forgot: besides she says, she cannot
look you in the face, though through a mask; therefore
would desire you to put out the candle.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I agree to all. Let her make haste.—There,
'tis out—[<i>Puts out the candle. Exit</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.] My
case is something better: I'd rather fight with Horner for
not lying with my sister, than for lying with my wife; and
of the two, I had rather find my sister too forward than
my wife. I expected no other from her free education, as
she calls it, and her passion for the town. Well, wife and
sister are names which make us expect love and duty,
pleasure and comfort; but we find 'em plagues and
torments, and are equally, though differently, troublesome
to their keeper; for we have as much ado to get people
to lie with our sisters as to keep 'em from lying with our
wives.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>masked, and in hoods and scarfs,
and a night-gown and petticoat of</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea's</span>.</p>

<p>What, are you come, sister? let us go then.—But first, let
me lock up my wife. Mrs. Margery, where are you?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Here, bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come hither, that I may lock you up: get you
in.—[<i>Locks the door.</i>] Come, sister, where are you now?
[Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>gives him her hand; but when
he lets her go, she steals softly on to the other
side of him, and is led away by him for his</i>
Sister, <span class="smcap">Alithea</span>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_340" id="Page_340">[Pg 340]</a></span></p>


<h4>SCENE II.—<span class="smcap">Horner's</span> <i>Lodging.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Horner</span> <i>and</i> Quack.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> What, all alone? not so much as one of your
cuckolds here, nor one of their wives! They use to take
their turns with you, as if they were to watch you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes, it often happens that a cuckold is but his
wife's spy, and is more upon family duty when he is with
her gallant abroad, hindering his pleasure, than when he
is at home with her playing the gallant. But the hardest
duty a married woman imposes upon a lover is keeping
her husband company always.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> And his fondness wearies you almost as soon as
hers.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> A pox! keeping a cuckold company, after you
have had his wife, is as tiresome as the company of a
country squire to a witty fellow of the town, when he has
got all his money.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> And as at first a man makes a friend of the
husband to get the wife, so at last you are fain to fall out
with the wife to be rid of the husband.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, most cuckold-makers are true courtiers;
when once a poor man has cracked his credit for 'em,
they can't abide to come near him.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> But at first, to draw him in, are so sweet, so
kind, so dear! just as you are to Pinchwife. But what
becomes of that intrigue with his wife?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> A pox! he's as surly as an alderman that has
been bit; and since he's so coy, his wife's kindness is in
vain, for she's a silly innocent.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Did she not send you a letter by him?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Yes; but that's a riddle I have not yet solved.
Allow the poor creature to be willing, she is silly too, and
he keeps her up so close—</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Yes, so close, that he makes her but the more
willing, and adds but revenge to her love; which two,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_341" id="Page_341">[Pg 341]</a></span>
when met, seldom fail of satisfying each other one way or
other.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What! here's the man we are talking of, I think.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>, <i>leading in his</i> Wife <i>masked, muffled,
and in her</i> Sister's <i>gown.</i></p>

<p>Pshaw!</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Bringing his wife to you is the next thing to
bringing a love-letter from her.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What means this?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> The last time, you know, sir, I brought you a
love-letter; now, you see, a mistress; I think you'll say I
am a civil man to you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, the devil take me, will I say thou art the
civilest man I ever met with; and I have known some.
I fancy I understand thee now better than I did the letter.
But, hark thee, in thy ear—</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nothing but the usual question, man: is she
sound, on thy word?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, you take her for a wench, and me for a
pimp?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Pshaw! wench and pimp, paw<a name="FNanchor_82_82" id="FNanchor_82_82"></a><a href="#Footnote_82_82" class="fnanchor">[82]</a> words; I know
thou art an honest fellow, and hast a great acquaintance
among the ladies, and perhaps hast made love for me,
rather than let me make love to thy wife.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, sir, in short, I am for no fooling.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nor I neither: therefore prithee, let's see her
face presently. Make her show, man: art thou sure I
don't know her?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I am sure you do know her.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> A pox! why dost thou bring her to me then?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Because she's a relation of mine—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Is she, faith, man? then thou art still more civil
and obliging, dear rogue.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_342" id="Page_342">[Pg 342]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Who desired me to bring her to you.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Then she is obliging, dear rogue.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> You'll make her welcome for my sake, I hope.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I hope she is handsome enough to make herself
welcome. Prithee let her unmask.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Do you speak to her; she would never be ruled
by me.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Madam—[Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span> <i>whispers to</i>
<span class="smcap">Horner</span>.] She says she must speak with me in private.
Withdraw, prithee.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] She's unwilling, it seems, I should
know all her indecent conduct in this business—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Well then, I'll leave you together, and hope when I am
gone, you'll agree; if not, you and I shan't agree, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> What means the fool? if she and I agree 'tis no
matter what you and I do.
[<i>Whispers to</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>, <i>who makes signs
with her hand for him to be gone.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> In the mean time I'll fetch a parson, and find
out Sparkish, and disabuse him. You would have me
fetch a parson, would you not? Well then—now I think
I am rid of her, and shall have no more trouble with
her—our sisters and daughters, like usurers' money, are
safest when put out; but our wives, like their writings,
never safe, but in our closets under lock and key. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Boy.</p>

<p><i>Boy.</i> Sir Jasper Fidget, sir, is coming up. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Here's the trouble of a cuckold now we are
talking of. A pox on him! has he not enough to do to
hinder his wife's sport, but he must other women's too?—Step
in here, madam. [<i>Exit</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> My best and dearest friend.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> [<i>Aside to</i> Quack.] The old style, doctor.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_343" id="Page_343">[Pg 343]</a></span>
Well, be short, for I am busy. What would
your impertinent wife have now?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Well guessed, i'faith; for I do come from her.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> To invite me to supper! Tell her, I can't come;
go.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nay, now you are out, faith; for my lady,
and the whole knot of the virtuous gang, as they call
themselves, are resolved upon a frolic of coming to you
to-night in masquerade, and are all dressed already.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I shan't be at home.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] Lord, how churlish he is to women!—[<i>Aloud.</i>]
Nay, prithee don't disappoint 'em; they'll
think 'tis my fault: prithee don't. I'll send in the
banquet and the fiddles. But make no noise on't; for
the poor virtuous rogues would not have it known, for the
world, that they go a-masquerading; and they would
come to no man's ball but yours.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well, well—get you gone; and tell 'em, if they
come, 'twill be at the peril of their honour and yours.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> He! he! he!—we'll trust you for that: farewell.
[<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i></p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Doctor, anon you too shall be my guest,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But now I'm going to a private feast.</span><br />
</p>

<p>[<i>Exeunt.</i></p>


<h4>SCENE III.—<i>The Piazza of Covent Garden.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Sparkish</span> <i>with a letter in his hand,</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>
<i>following.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> But who would have thought a woman could
have been false to me? By the world, I could not have
thought it.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> You were for giving and taking liberty: she has
taken it only, sir, now you find in that letter. You are a
frank person, and so is she, you see there.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, if this be her hand—for I never saw it.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_344" id="Page_344">[Pg 344]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> 'Tis no matter whether that be her hand or no;
I am sure this hand, at her desire, led her to Mr. Horner,
with whom I left her just now, to go fetch a parson to 'em
at their desire too, to deprive you of her for ever; for it
seems yours was but a mock marriage.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Indeed, she would needs have it that 'twas
Harcourt himself, in a parson's habit, that married us;
but I'm sure he told me 'twas his brother Ned.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> O, there 'tis out; and you were deceived, not
she: for you are such a frank person. But I must be
gone.—You'll find her at Mr. Horner's. Go, and believe
your eyes. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, I'll to her, and call her as many crocodiles,
sirens, harpies, and other heathenish names, as a poet
would do a mistress who had refused to hear his
suit, nay more, his verses on her.—But stay, is not
that she following a torch at t'other end of the Piazza?
and from Horner's certainly—'tis so.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Alithea</span> <i>following a torch, and</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span> <i>behind.</i></p>

<p>You are well met, madam, though you don't think
so. What, you have made a short visit to Mr. Horner?
but I suppose you'll return to him presently, by that time
the parson can be with him.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Mr. Horner and the parson, sir!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Come, madam, no more dissembling, no more
jilting; for I am no more a frank person.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> How's this?</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> So, 'twill work, I see. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Could you find out no easy country fool to
abuse? none but me, a gentleman of wit and pleasure
about the town? But it was your pride to be too hard
for a man of parts, unworthy false woman! false as a
friend that lends a man money to lose; false as dice, who
undo those that trust all they have to 'em.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> He has been a great bubble, by his similes, as
they say. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_345" id="Page_345">[Pg 345]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> You have been too merry, sir, at your wedding-dinner,
sure.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> What, d'ye mock me too?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Or you have been deluded.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> By you.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Let me understand you.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Have you the confidence, (I should call it
something else, since you know your guilt,) to stand my
just reproaches? you did not write an impudent letter to
Mr. Horner? who I find now has clubbed with you in
deluding me with his aversion for women, that I might
not, forsooth, suspect him for my rival.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> D'ye think the gentleman can be jealous now,
madam? [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> I write a letter to Mr. Horner!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Nay, madam, do not deny it. Your brother
showed it me just now; and told me likewise, he left
you at Horner's lodging to fetch a parson to marry you
to him; and I wish you joy, madam, joy, joy; and to him
too, much joy; and to myself more joy, for not marrying
you.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> [<i>Aside.</i>] So, I find my brother would break off
the match; and I can consent to't, since I see this gentleman
can be made jealous.—[<i>Aloud.</i>] O Lucy, by his
rude usage and jealousy, he makes me almost afraid I
am married to him. Art thou sure 'twas Harcourt himself,
and no parson, that married us?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> No, madam, I thank you. I suppose, that was
a contrivance too of Mr. Horner's and yours, to make
Harcourt play the parson; but I would as little as you
have him one now, no, not for the world. For, shall I
tell you another truth? I never had any passion for you
till now, for now I hate you. 'Tis true, I might have
married your portion, as other men of parts of the town
do sometimes; and so, your servant. And to show my
unconcernedness, I'll come to your wedding, and resign
you with as much joy, as I would a stale wench to a new<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_346" id="Page_346">[Pg 346]</a></span>
cully; nay, with as much joy as I would after the first
night, if I had been married to you. There's for you;
and so your servant, servant. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> How was I deceived in a man!</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> You'll believe then a fool may be made jealous
now? for that easiness in him that suffers him to be led
by a wife, will likewise permit him to be persuaded
against her by others.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> But marry Mr. Horner! my brother does not
intend it, sure: if I thought he did, I would take thy
advice, and Mr. Harcourt for my husband. And now I
wish, that if there be any over-wise woman of the town,
who, like me, would marry a fool for fortune, liberty, or
title, first, that her husband may love play, and be a cully
to all the town but her, and suffer none but Fortune to
be mistress of his purse; then, if for liberty, that he may
send her into the country, under the conduct of some
huswifely mother-in-law; and if for title, may the world
give 'em none but that of cuckold.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> And for her greater curse, madam, may he not
deserve it.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Away, impertinent! Is not this my old Lady
Lanterlu's?<a name="FNanchor_83_83" id="FNanchor_83_83"></a><a href="#Footnote_83_83" class="fnanchor">[83]</a></p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Yes, madam.—[<i>Aside.</i>] And here I hope we
shall find Mr. Harcourt. [<i>Exeunt.</i></p>


<h4>SCENE IV.—<span class="smcap">Horner's</span> <i>Lodging. A table, banquet,
and bottles.</i></h4>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>, Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>,
<i>and</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> A pox! they are come too soon—before I have
sent back my new mistress. All that I have now to do
is to lock her in, that they may not see her. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_347" id="Page_347">[Pg 347]</a></span></p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> That we may be sure of our welcome, we have
brought our entertainment with us, and are resolved to
treat thee, dear toad.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> And that we may be merry to purpose, have
left Sir Jasper and my old Lady Squeamish, quarrelling
at home at backgammon.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Therefore let us make use of our time,
lest they should chance to interrupt us.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Let us sit then.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> First, that you may be private, let me lock this
door and that, and I'll wait upon you presently.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> No, sir, shut 'em only, and your lips for ever;
for we must trust you as much as our women.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> You know all vanity's killed in me; I have no
occasion for talking.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Now, ladies, supposing we had drank each of
us our two bottles, let us speak the truth of our hearts.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain. and Mrs. Squeam.</i> Agreed.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> By this brimmer, for truth is nowhere else to be
found—[<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.] not in thy heart, false man!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> You have found me a true man, I'm sure.
[<i>Aside to</i> Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.] Not every way.—But let
us sit and be merry. [<i>Sings.</i></p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Why should our damned tyrants oblige us to live</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">On the pittance of pleasure which they only give?</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 5.5em;">We must not rejoice</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 5.5em;">With wine and with noise:</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">In vain we must wake in a dull bed alone,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Whilst to our warm rival the bottle they're gone.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 5.5em;">Then lay aside charms,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 5.5em;">And take up these arms.<a name="FNanchor_84_84" id="FNanchor_84_84"></a><a href="#Footnote_84_84" class="fnanchor">[84]</a></span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">'Tis wine only gives 'em their courage and wit;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Because we live sober, to men we submit.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 5.5em;">If for beauties you'd pass,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 5.5em;">Take a lick of the glass,</span><br />
<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_348" id="Page_348">[Pg 348]</a></span><span style="margin-left: 2em;">'Twill mend your complexions, and when they are gone,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">The best red we have is the red of the grape:</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Then, sisters, lay't on,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 6em;">And damn a good shape.</span><br />
</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Fain.</i> Dear brimmer! Well, in token of our
openness and plain-dealing, let us throw our masks over
our heads.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, 'twill come to the glasses anon. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Lovely brimmer! let me enjoy him first.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> No, I never part with a gallant till I've tried
him. Dear brimmer! that makest our husbands short-sighted.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> And our bashful gallants bold.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And, for want of a gallant, the butler
lovely in our eyes.—Drink, eunuch.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Drink, thou representative of a husband.—Damn
a husband!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> And, as it were a husband, an old keeper.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And an old grandmother.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And an English bawd, and a French surgeon.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Ay, we have all reason to curse 'em.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> For my sake, ladies?</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> No, for our own; for the first spoils all young
gallants' industry.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> And the other's art makes 'em bold only
with common women.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And rather run the hazard of the vile
distemper amongst them, than of a denial amongst us.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> The filthy toads choose mistresses now as
they do stuffs, for having been fancied and worn by
others.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> For being common and cheap.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Whilst women of quality, like the richest
stuffs, lie untumbled, and unasked for.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, neat, and cheap, and new, often they think
best.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_349" id="Page_349">[Pg 349]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> No, sir, the beasts will be known by a
mistress longer than by a suit.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And 'tis not for cheapness neither.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> No; for the vain fops will take up druggets,
and embroider 'em. But I wonder at the depraved
appetites of witty men; they use to be out of the common
road, and hate imitation. Pray tell me, beast, when you
were a man, why you rather chose to club with a multitude
in a common house for an entertainment, than to be
the only guest at a good table.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, faith, ceremony and expectation are unsufferable
to those that are sharp bent. People always eat
with the best stomach at an ordinary, where every man is
snatching for the best bit.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Though he get a cut over the fingers.—But I
have heard, that people eat most heartily of another man's
meat, that is, what they do not pay for.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> When they are sure of their welcome and freedom;
for ceremony in love and eating is as ridiculous as
in fighting: falling on briskly is all should be done on
those occasions.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Well then, let me tell you, sir, there is nowhere
more freedom than in our houses; and we take
freedom from a young person as a sign of good breeding;
and a person may be as free as he pleases with us,
as frolic, as gamesome, as wild as he will.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Han't I heard you all declaim against wild
men?</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Yes; but for all that, we think wildness in a
man as desirable a quality as in a duck or rabbit: a tame
man! foh!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I know not, but your reputations frightened me
as much as your faces invited me.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Our reputation! Lord, why should you not
think that we women make use of our reputation, as you
men of yours, only to deceive the world with less suspicion?
Our virtue is like the statesman's religion, the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_350" id="Page_350">[Pg 350]</a></span>
quaker's word, the gamester's oath, and the great man's
honour; but to cheat those that trust us.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And that demureness, coyness, and
modesty, that you see in our faces in the boxes at plays,
is as much a sign of a kind woman, as a vizard-mask in
the pit.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> For, I assure you, women are least masked
when they have the velvet vizard on.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> You would have found us modest women in
our denials only.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Our bashfulness is only the reflection of
the men's.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> We blush when they are shamefaced.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I beg your pardon, ladies, I was deceived in
you devilishly. But why that mighty pretence to
honour?</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> We have told you; but sometimes 'twas for
the same reason you men pretend business often, to avoid
ill company, to enjoy the better and more privately those
you love.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> But why would you ne'er give a friend a wink
then?</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Faith, your reputation frightened us, as much
as ours did you, you were so notoriously lewd.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And you so seemingly honest.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Was that all that deterred you?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And so expensive—you allow freedom, you say.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Ay, ay.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> That I was afraid of losing my little money, as
well as my little time, both which my other pleasures
required.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Money! foh! you talk like a little fellow
now: do such as we expect money?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I beg your pardon, madam, I must confess, I
have heard that great ladies, like great merchants, set but
the higher prices upon what they have, because they are
not in necessity of taking the first offer.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_351" id="Page_351">[Pg 351]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Such as we make sale of our hearts?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> We bribed for our love? foh!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> With your pardon ladies, I know, like great
men in offices, you seem to exact flattery and attendance
only from your followers; but you have receivers about
you, and such fees to pay, a man is afraid to pass your
grants. Besides, we must let you win at cards, or we
lose your hearts; and if you make an assignation, 'tis at
a goldsmith's, jeweller's, or china-house; where for your
honour you deposit to him, he must pawn his to the
punctual cit, and so paying for what you take up, pays
for what he takes up.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Would you not have us assured of our
gallants' love?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> For love is better known by liberality
than by jealousy.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> For one may be dissembled, the other not.—[<i>Aside.</i>]
But my jealousy can be no longer dissembled,
and they are telling ripe.—[<i>Aloud.</i>]—Come, here's to our
gallants in waiting, whom we must name, and I'll begin.
This is my false rogue. [<i>Claps him on the back.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> How!</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, all will out now. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Did you not tell me, 'twas for my sake
only you reported yourself no man? [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> Oh, wretch! did you not swear to me,
'twas for my love and honour you passed for that thing
you do? [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, so.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Come, speak, ladies: this is my false villain.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> And mine too.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> And mine.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Well then, you are all three my false rogues
too, and there's an end on't.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Well then, there's no remedy; sister sharers,
let us not fall out, but have a care of our honour.
Though we get no presents, no jewels of him, we are<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_352" id="Page_352">[Pg 352]</a></span>
savers of our honour, the jewel of most value and use,
which shines yet to the world unsuspected, though it be
counterfeit.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Nay, and is e'en as good as if it were true, provided
the world think so; for honour, like beauty now,
only depends on the opinion of others.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Well, Harry Common, I hope you can be true
to three. Swear; but 'tis to no purpose to require your
oath, for you are as often forsworn as you swear to new
women.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Come, faith, madam, let us e'en pardon one
another; for all the difference I find betwixt we men and
you women, we forswear ourselves at the beginning of an
amour, you as long as it lasts.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>, <i>and</i> Old Lady <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Oh, my Lady Fidget, was this your cunning,
to come to Mr. Horner without me? but you have been
nowhere else, I hope.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> No, Sir Jasper.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> And you came straight hither, Biddy?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Yes, indeed, lady grandmother.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> 'Tis well, 'tis well; I knew when once they
were thoroughly acquainted with poor Horner, they'd
ne'er be from him: you may let her masquerade it
with my wife and Horner, and I warrant her reputation
safe.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> Boy.</p>

<p><i>Boy.</i> O, sir, here's the gentleman come, whom you bid
me not suffer to come up, without giving you notice, with
a lady too, and other gentlemen.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Do you all go in there, whilst I send 'em away;
and, boy, do you desire 'em to stay below till I come,
which shall be immediately.
[<i>Exeunt</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>, Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>,
Lady <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>, Mrs. <span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>, <i>and</i>
Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_353" id="Page_353">[Pg 353]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Boy.</i> Yes, sir. [<i>Exit.</i></p>

<p class="center">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span> <i>at the other door, and returns
with</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> You would not take my advice, to be gone
home before your husband came back, he'll now discover
all; yet pray, my dearest, be persuaded to go home, and
leave the rest to my management; I'll let you down the
back way.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> I don't know the way home, so I don't.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> My man shall wait upon you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> No, don't you believe that I'll go at all;
what, are you weary of me already?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, my life, 'tis that I may love you long, 'tis
to secure my love, and your reputation with your husband;
he'll never receive you again else.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What care I? d'ye think to frighten me
with that? I don't intend to go to him again; you shall
be my husband now.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I cannot be your husband, dearest, since you
are married to him.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O, would you make me believe that?
Don't I see every day at London here, women leave
their first husbands, and go and live with other men as
their wives? pish, pshaw! you'd make me angry, but
that I love you so mainly.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So, they are coming up—In again, in, I hear
'em.—[<i>Exit</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.] Well, a silly mistress is
like a weak place, soon got, soon lost, a man has scarce
time for plunder; she betrays her husband first to her
gallant, and then her gallant to her husband.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife, Alithea, Harcourt, Sparkish,
Lucy</span>, <i>and a</i> Parson.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, madam, 'tis not the sudden change of
your dress, the confidence of your asseverations, and
your false witness there, shall persuade me I did not
bring you hither just now; here's my witness, who cannot<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_354" id="Page_354">[Pg 354]</a></span>
deny it, since you must be confronted.—Mr. Horner,
did not I bring this lady to you just now?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Now must I wrong one woman for another's
sake,—but that's no new thing with me, for in these
cases I am still on the criminal's side against the
innocent. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Pray speak, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> It must be so. I must be impudent, and try
my luck; impudence uses to be too hard for truth. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What, you are studying an evasion or excuse
for her! Speak, sir.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, faith, I am something backward only to
speak in women's affairs or disputes.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> She bids you speak.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Ay, pray, sir, do, pray satisfy him.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Then truly, you did bring that lady to me just
now.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> O ho!</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> How, sir?</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> How, Horner?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> What mean you, sir? I always took you for a
man of honour.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Ay, so much a man of honour, that I must save
my mistress, I thank you, come what will on't. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> So, if I had had her, she'd have made me believe
the moon had been made of a Christmas pie.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Now could I speak, if I durst, and solve the
riddle, who am the author of it. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> O unfortunate woman! A combination
against my honour! which most concerns me now,
because you share in my disgrace, sir, and it is your
censure, which I must now suffer, that troubles me, not
theirs.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Madam, then have no trouble, you shall now
see 'tis possible for me to love too, without being
jealous; I will not only believe your innocence myself,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_355" id="Page_355">[Pg 355]</a></span>
but make all the world believe it.—[<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.]
Horner, I must now be concerned for this lady's honour.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And I must be concerned for a lady's honour
too.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> This lady has her honour, and I will protect it.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> My lady has not her honour, but has given it
me to keep, and I will preserve it.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I understand you not.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I would not have you.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> What's the matter with 'em all?
[<i>Peeping in behind.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Come, come, Mr. Horner, no more disputing;
here's the parson, I brought him not in vain.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> No, sir, I'll employ him, if this lady please.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> How! what d'ye mean?</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ay, what does he mean?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Why, I have resigned your sister to him, he has
my consent.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But he has not mine, sir; a woman's injured
honour, no more than a man's, can be repaired or satisfied
by any but him that first wronged it; and you shall
marry her presently, or—[<i>Lays his hand on his sword.</i></p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> O Lord, they'll kill poor Mr. Horner!
besides, he shan't marry her whilst I stand by, and look
on; I'll not lose my second husband so.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> What do I see?</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> My sister in my clothes!</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Ha!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, pray now don't quarrel about finding
work for the parson, he shall marry me to Mr. Horner;
or now, I believe, you have enough of me.
[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Damned, damned loving changeling! [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Pray, sister, pardon me for telling so
many lies of you.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_356" id="Page_356">[Pg 356]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> I suppose the riddle is plain now.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> No, that must be my work.—Good sir, hear me.
[<i>Kneels to</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>, <i>who stands doggedly with
his hat over his eyes.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I will never hear woman again, but make 'em
all silent thus—[<i>Offers to draw upon his</i> Wife.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> No, that must not be.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> You then shall go first, 'tis all one to me.
[<i>Offers to draw on</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>, <i>but is stopped by</i>
<span class="smcap">Harcourt</span>.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> Hold!</p>

<p class="center"><i>Re-enter</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper Fidget</span>, Lady <span class="smcap">Fidget</span>, Lady
<span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>, Mrs. <span class="smcap">Dainty Fidget</span>, <i>and</i> Mrs.
<span class="smcap">Squeamish</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> What's the matter? what's the matter? pray,
what's the matter, sir? I beseech you communicate, sir.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Why, my wife has communicated, sir, as your
wife may have done too, sir, if she knows him, sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Pshaw, with him! ha! ha! he!</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> D'ye mock me, sir? a cuckold is a kind of a
wild beast; have a care, sir.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> No, sure, you mock me, sir. He cuckold
you! it can't be, ha! ha! he! why, I'll tell you, sir—[<i>Offers
to whisper.</i></p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I tell you again, he has whored my wife, and
yours too, if he knows her, and all the women he comes
near; 'tis not his dissembling, his hypocrisy, can wheedle
me.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> How! does he dissemble? is he a hypocrite?
Nay, then—how—wife—sister, is he a hypocrite?</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> A hypocrite! a dissembler! Speak,
young harlotry, speak, how?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nay, then—O my head too!—O thou
libidinous lady!</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> O thou harloting harlotry! hast thou
done't then?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_357" id="Page_357">[Pg 357]</a></span></p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Speak, good Horner, art thou a dissembler,
a rogue? hast thou—</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> So!</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> I'll fetch you off, and her too, if she will but
hold her tongue. [<i>Apart to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Canst thou? I'll give thee—[<i>Apart to</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>.</p>

<p><i>Lucy. [To</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.] Pray have but patience to
hear me, sir, who am the unfortunate cause of all this
confusion. Your wife is innocent, I only culpable; for
I put her upon telling you all these lies concerning my
mistress, in order to the breaking off the match between
Mr. Sparkish and her, to make way for Mr. Harcourt.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> Did you so, eternal rotten tooth? Then, it
seems, my mistress was not false to me, I was only deceived
by you. Brother, that should have been, now
man of conduct, who is a frank person now, to bring
your wife to her lover, ha?</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> I assure you, sir, she came not to Mr. Horner
out of love, for she loves him no more—</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Hold, I told lies for you, but you shall
tell none for me, for I do love Mr. Horner with all my
soul, and nobody shall say me nay; pray, don't you go
to make poor Mr. Horner believe to the contrary; 'tis
spitefully done of you, I'm sure.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Peace, dear idiot. [<i>Aside to</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> Nay, I will not peace.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Not till I make you.</p>

<p class="center"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Dorilant</span> <i>and</i> Quack.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Horner, your servant; I am the doctor's guest,
he must excuse our intrusion.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> But what's the matter, gentlemen? for Heaven's
sake, what's the matter?</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Oh, 'tis well you are come. 'Tis a censorious
world we live in; you may have brought me a reprieve,
or else I had died for a crime I never committed, and
these innocent ladies had suffered with me; therefore,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_358" id="Page_358">[Pg 358]</a></span>
pray satisfy these worthy, honourable, jealous
gentlemen—that—[<i>Whispers.</i></p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> O, I understand you, is that all?—Sir Jasper,
by Heavens, and upon the word of a physician, sir—[<i>Whispers
to</i> Sir <span class="smcap">Jasper</span>.</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Nay, I do believe you truly.—Pardon me,
my virtuous lady, and dear of honour.</p>

<p><i>L. Squeam.</i> What, then all's right again?</p>

<p><i>Sir Jasp.</i> Ay, ay, and now let us satisfy him too.
[<i>They whisper with</i> <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> An eunuch! Pray, no fooling with me.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> I'll bring half the chirurgeons in town to
swear it.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> They!—they'll swear a man that bled to death
through his wounds, died of an apoplexy.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Pray, hear me, sir—why, all the town has
heard the report of him.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But does all the town believe it?</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> Pray, inquire a little, and first of all these.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> I'm sure when I left the town, he was the
lewdest fellow in't.</p>

<p><i>Quack.</i> I tell you, sir, he has been in France since;
pray, ask but these ladies and gentlemen, your friend Mr.
Dorilant. Gentlemen and ladies, han't you all heard the
late sad report of poor Mr. Horner?</p>

<p><i>All the Ladies.</i> Ay, ay, ay.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> Why, thou jealous fool, dost thou doubt it? he's
an arrant French capon.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> 'Tis false, sir, you shall not disparage
poor Mr. Horner, for to my certain knowledge—</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> O, hold!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Stop her mouth! [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span>.</p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> Upon my honour, sir, 'tis as true—[<i>To</i>
<span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Dain.</i> D'ye think we would have been seen in his
company?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Squeam.</i> Trust our unspotted reputations with him?</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_359" id="Page_359">[Pg 359]</a></span></p>

<p><i>L. Fid.</i> This you get, and we too, by trusting your
secret to a fool. [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Peace, madam.—[<i>Aside to</i> Quack.] Well,
doctor, is not this a good design, that carries a man on
unsuspected, and brings him off safe?</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> Well, if this were true—but my wife—[<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p class="center">[<span class="smcap">Dorilant</span> <i>whispers with</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Pinchwife</span>.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> Come, brother, your wife is yet innocent, you
see; but have a care of too strong an imagination, lest,
like an over-concerned timorous gamester, by fancying an
unlucky cast, it should come. Women and fortune are
truest still to those that trust 'em.</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> And any wild thing grows but the more fierce
and hungry for being kept up, and more dangerous to
the keeper.</p>

<p><i>Alith.</i> There's doctrine for all husbands, Mr. Harcourt.</p>

<p><i>Har.</i> I edify, madam, so much, that I am impatient
till I am one.</p>

<p><i>Dor.</i> And I edify so much by example, I will never be
one.</p>

<p><i>Spark.</i> And because I will not disparage my parts, I'll
ne'er be one.</p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> And I, alas! can't be one.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i> But I must be one—against my will to a
country wife, with a country murrain to me!</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> And I must be a country wife still too, I
find; for I can't, like a city one, be rid of my musty
husband, and do what I list. [<i>Aside.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i> Now, sir, I must pronounce your wife innocent,
though I blush whilst I do it; and I am the only man by
her now exposed to shame, which I will straight drown
in wine, as you shall your suspicion; and the ladies'
troubles we'll divert with a ballad.—Doctor, where are
your maskers?</p>

<p><i>Lucy.</i> Indeed, she's innocent, sir, I am her witness,
and her end of coming out was but to see her sister's
wedding; and what she has said to your face of her love to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_360" id="Page_360">[Pg 360]</a></span>
Mr. Horner, was but the usual innocent revenge on a
husband's jealousy;—was it not, madam, speak?</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Pinch.</i> [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Lucy</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Horner</span>.] Since you'll
have me tell more lies—[<i>Aloud.</i>] Yes, indeed, bud.</p>

<p><i>Pinch.</i></p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">For my own sake fain I would all believe;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Cuckolds, like lovers, should themselves deceive.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But—[<i>Sighs</i></span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">His honour is least safe (too late I find)</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Who trusts it with a foolish wife or friend.</span><br />
</p>

<p class="center"><i>A Dance of Cuckolds.</i></p>

<p><i>Horn.</i></p>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Vain fops but court and dress, and keep a pother,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">To pass for women's men with one another;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But he who aims by women to be prized,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">First by the men, you see, must be despised.</span><br />
</p>

<p>[<i>Exeunt.</i></p>



<hr class="chap" />
<h3>EPILOGUE.</h3>

<h4>SPOKEN BY MRS. KNEP.<a name="FNanchor_85_85" id="FNanchor_85_85"></a><a href="#Footnote_85_85" class="fnanchor">[85]</a></h4>

<p>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Now you the vigorous, who daily here</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">O'er vizard-mask in public domineer,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And what you'd do to her, if in place where;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Nay, have the confidence to cry, "Come out!"</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Yet when she says, "Lead on!" you are not stout;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But to your well-dressed brother straight turn round,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And cry "Pox on her, Ned, she can't be sound!"</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Then slink away, a fresh one to engage,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">With so much seeming heat and loving rage,</span><br />
<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_361" id="Page_361">[Pg 361]</a></span><span style="margin-left: 2em;">You'd frighten listening actress on the stage;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Till she at last has seen you huffing come,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And talk of keeping in the tiring-room,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Yet cannot be provoked to lead her home.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Next, you Falstaffs of fifty, who beset</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Your buckram maidenheads, which your friends get;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And whilst to them you of achievements boast,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">They share the booty, and laugh at your cost.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">In fine, you essenced boys, both old and young,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Who would be thought so eager, brisk, and strong,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Yet do the ladies, not their husbands wrong;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Whose purses for your manhood make excuse,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And keep your Flanders mares for show not use;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Encouraged by our woman's man to-day,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">A Horner's part may vainly think to play;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And may intrigues so bashfully disown,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">That they may doubted be by few or none;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">May kiss the cards at picquet, ombre, loo,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And so be taught to kiss the lady too;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But, gallants, have a care, faith, what you do.</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The world, which to no man his due will give,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">You by experience know you can deceive,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And men may still believe you vigorous,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But then we women—there's no cozening us.</span><br />
</p>


<hr class="full" />

<h3><a name="NOTES" id="NOTES">NOTES.</a></h3>



<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_69_69" id="Footnote_69_69"></a><a href="#FNanchor_69_69"><span class="label">[69]</span></a> I am out of patience when anything is blamed, not because it is thought
coarsely and inelegantly composed, but because it is new: when for the ancients
not indulgence, but honour and rewards are demanded.—<i>Epist.</i> II. i. 76-8.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_70_70" id="Footnote_70_70"></a><a href="#FNanchor_70_70"><span class="label">[70]</span></a> Charles Hart, grandson of Shakespeare's sister, Joan Hart, was
one of the most distinguished actors of his time. He excelled
chiefly in tragedy, and it was said of him that he "might teach any
king on earth how to comport himself." He retired from the stage
in 1682, and died in the following year.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_71_71" id="Footnote_71_71"></a><a href="#FNanchor_71_71"><span class="label">[71]</span></a> A character in Ben Jonson's comedy, <i>The Alchemist</i>.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_72_72" id="Footnote_72_72"></a><a href="#FNanchor_72_72"><span class="label">[72]</span></a> <i>Sir Martin Mar-all</i> is the title of a comedy by Dryden, first
produced in 1667. In the scene referred to, Sir Martin serenades
his mistress, going through the motions of singing and accompanying
himself with the lute, while the actual performance is that of his
man, who is concealed behind him. The lady discovers the imposition,
through Sir Martin's failing to leave off at the right time.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_73_73" id="Footnote_73_73"></a><a href="#FNanchor_73_73"><span class="label">[73]</span></a> Chatelain's was a famous French ordinary in Covent Garden,
much frequented by wits and men of fashion. It is mentioned by
Pepys, and often referred to by Shadwell in his plays. The Cock
Tavern was in Bow Street, near where Wycherley and his first wife,
the Countess of Drogheda, lodged; and it was here that the
windows had to be left open when Wycherley frequented it, that the
countess might see there were no ladies in the company.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_74_74" id="Footnote_74_74"></a><a href="#FNanchor_74_74"><span class="label">[74]</span></a> See <a href="#Footnote_34_34">note 34</a>.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_75_75" id="Footnote_75_75"></a><a href="#FNanchor_75_75"><span class="label">[75]</span></a> "Covent Garden Drolery, Or a Colection of all the Choice
Songs, Poems, Prologues, and Epilogues (Sung and Spoken at
Courts and Theaters) never in Print before. Written by the refined'st
Witts of the Age. And Collected by R[ichard] B[rome]
Servant to His Majestie. London, Printed for James Magnes neer
the Piazza in Russel-Street, 1672."—<i>Tarugo's Wiles, or the Coffee
House</i>; a comedy by Sir Thomas St. Serle, produced in 1668.—<i>The
Slighted Maid</i>, a comedy by Sir Robert Stapleton, produced in
1663.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_76_76" id="Footnote_76_76"></a><a href="#FNanchor_76_76"><span class="label">[76]</span></a> A sweet-scented powder.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_77_77" id="Footnote_77_77"></a><a href="#FNanchor_77_77"><span class="label">[77]</span></a> Carefully.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_78_78" id="Footnote_78_78"></a><a href="#FNanchor_78_78"><span class="label">[78]</span></a> Succeeds.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_79_79" id="Footnote_79_79"></a><a href="#FNanchor_79_79"><span class="label">[79]</span></a> Romp; tomboy.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_80_80" id="Footnote_80_80"></a><a href="#FNanchor_80_80"><span class="label">[80]</span></a> A well frequented ordinary near Charing Cross, on the site of
Drummond's Bank.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_81_81" id="Footnote_81_81"></a><a href="#FNanchor_81_81"><span class="label">[81]</span></a> In Wycherley's time the square of Covent Garden must have
presented an elegant appearance. The Piazza, designed by Inigo
Jones, extended, like the modern piazza, along the northern and
eastern sides; on the west stood St. Paul's Church, built by the
same famous architect, and on the south the square was bordered
by the gardens of Bedford House. "The area was inclosed with
railings, at sixty feet from the buildings; and in the centre was a
dial, with a gilt ball, raised upon a column." <i>Timbs' Curiosities of
London.</i> In 1671 the market was established, but was held, originally,
only on the southern side of the square, under the wall of
Bedford Gardens. The houses within the Piazza were then occupied
by persons of rank and fashion.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_82_82" id="Footnote_82_82"></a><a href="#FNanchor_82_82"><span class="label">[82]</span></a> Paw, adj. naughty. An affected word fashionable in the
latter half of the seventeenth century.—<i>Wright.</i></p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_83_83" id="Footnote_83_83"></a><a href="#FNanchor_83_83"><span class="label">[83]</span></a> "Lanterloo" or "langteraloo" was the name of a game at
cards.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_84_84" id="Footnote_84_84"></a><a href="#FNanchor_84_84"><span class="label">[84]</span></a> The glasses.</p></div>

<div class="footnote">

<p><a name="Footnote_85_85" id="Footnote_85_85"></a><a href="#FNanchor_85_85"><span class="label">[85]</span></a> Or Knipp, the friend of Mr. Pepys. She played the part of
Lady Fidget.</p></div>

